{"Episode Name": "Bonus: Is America on the Path to Authoritarianism?", "Podcast Name": "Foriegn Affairs", "Episode Link": "https://foreignaffairsmagazine.podbean.com/e/bonus-is-america-on-the-path-to-authoritarianism/", "duration": "45:06", "text": " I'm Dan Kurtz-Failing, and this is the Foreign Affairs interview. As long as Trump is the most popular Republican, as long as he is more popular within Republican ranks, than anyone who opposes him, you're not going to see the fact. It's because, you know, no one's experienced this kind of authoritarianism before that they sort of figure it can't happen to them. A month in the Donald Trump's Second-term in office, many are alarmed by what they see as emerging signs of democratic erosion. In a new essay called The Path to American Authoritarianism, the scholar Stephen Levitsky in Luke and Wei make the case that such alarm is justified, that the administration's early moves could herald an irreversible transformation of the US political system with major implications for global democracy, drawing on their research on democratic decline worldwide. Levitsky in Wei argue that the United States faces a particular kind of risk that many observers miss. A form of competitive authoritarianism in which elections continue, with a state apparatus, is weaponized against opposition. They spoke with senior editor Yu Farabanks about the global playbook for authoritarian regimes and the stakes for US democracy. Hi, Luke and hi, Steve. It's a real pleasure to have you. And I'm really excited to talk about your piece, Yu Farabanks, the path to American authoritarianism. And you made the case in that piece that, and I'm quoting you here, American democracy will likely break down during the Second Trump administration. In the sense that it will cease to meet standard criteria for liberal democracy. And you're arguing the piece that no matter how much distaste some American voters may feel for Trump, they may not have understood what was coming this term, because, and you wrote, the breakdown of democracy in the United States will not give rise to a classic dictatorship in which elections are a sham and opposition forces are locked up. Trump will not be able to rewrite the Constitution, but contemporary authoritarianism does not require the destruction of the constitutional order. So can you walk us through this new form of what you call competitive authoritarianism or elected autocracy that's really emerged since the Cold War? Maybe Steve, you can tell us about that and why that's emerged. Competitive authoritarian regimes are regimes that are actually competitive in the sense that there are multi-party elections. There is, opposition is legal, the opposition is above board and competes seriously for power. And once a while, even when, I would say, polling in 2023 is an example of the opposition winning in a competitive authoritarian election. So from a bit of a distance, competitive authoritarian regimes may look democratic, but they're not democratic because systematic weaponization and abuse of the state, of the machinery of government. And its deployment against critics and rivals tilts the playing field against the opposition. So competition is real, but it's not fair. There are abuse of power in every democracy. There are civil liberties violations in every democracy, but in competitive authoritarian regimes, it's systematic enough that it begins to tilt the playing field against the opposition. As you mentioned, this is mostly a post-Cold War phenomenon. There have been competitive authoritarian regimes at other times in history, but they became much, much more widespread after the collapse of communism because beginning in the late 1980s, and I would say even still today, electoral regimes, competitive elections are really the most globally legitimate political arrangement. It's really hard, it's really costly to just shove aside elections entirely and rule with a single party, as in the communist era, or with the military like Pinochet or Franco. There are some such regimes, but there's still much, much less common. It's still much more legitimate to hold elections. And so the majority of new autocracies that have been born in the 21st century have been this, have been competitive authoritarian regimes, elected governments that abuse power and tilt the playing field against the rivals. In the 1970s, almost all authoritarian regimes were kind of formal in the sense that there was no elections to the top executive, it was a formal single party rule. Now close to 80% of autocracies of authoritarian regimes have some sort of multi-cannet elections for the executive. So it's really become, in some ways, the modal form of authoritarianism since the end of the Cold War, even today. I think we have the sense that the United States maybe were a little bit behind in our way of thinking, our little stuck in the Cold War, and we think of these dictatorships where opposition parties are locked up and that really have repressive features. And people that I've spoken to, they say, well, Trump has all these kinds of limitations and look at his first term. He promised a lot, he had certain big, big goals. And in the end, he wasn't able to break the system. We had Biden, it seemed like a sort of normal presidency. You argued in your piece that this second term is really different from the first. And why is that maybe Luke in? In the first term, when Trump was the first law in 2016, really no one expected him to win. He was himself quite surprised. Just under taking a kind of hostile takeover of the Republican Party, he had virtually no allies, in the party. And so he was basically forced to rely on many establishment figures who shared basic commitments to the Democratic system. And he also had no plan coming in. He was very ad hoc. And as a result, many of his kind of worst instincts were held in check, various efforts to prosecute people like John Kerry and Hillary Clinton, sort of never really saw the light of day in large part because career government officials, basically nicked them before they could sort of take shape. Now it's a really different situation he's had eight years to establish a stunning degree of control over the Republican Party. I mean, the Republican Party now is just willing to basically do anything he tells them to. And as a result, the kind of transformation I think has been stunning. And I just want to add here that this piece was written a few weeks ago. It feels to me very optimistic in some ways if I had to rewrite it. I think most even I are kind of much less confident in the sort of core features of the Democratic system than we were. Just to reiterate, Trump came in with no team and no plan the first time around in 2017. And he did not control the Republican Party. And so he governed with conservative technocrats and a more or less mainstream Republican, conservative Republican politicians and they constrained him. None of that is true anymore. He completely owns the Republican Party. There's no dissent. There is no check from the Republican Party. The entire House of Representatives, led by Republicans, has abdicated and stepped aside and Trump is governing with loyalists, not with either skilled technocrats or Republican politicians. He's governing with loyalists. There are no adults in the room. There are no checks on his behavior, which is not to say he'll get away with everything he wants to get away with, but he is much, much greater room to maneuver than he had the first term. Yeah. On the one hand, there's this amazing sense that even observers, foreign observers, I'm sitting down here in South Africa, South Africans who've been quite targeted by Trump, Americans, are very shocked by what's actually transpired in his first few weeks. And yet, on the other hand, really fascinating thing about your piece is that it shows there's a real blueprint that he's following. In other words, there could have been an expectation of some of what he's done if you really understood this regime form that you guys lay out. So let's just sketch that out. You begin by really describing the very granular ways that authoritarians who enter in a competitive system who still have elections begin by purging the civil service. Why is that so important? Yeah. I mean, so basically, even in country like the United States, which is relatively less, I fare, the government just has enormous power over people's lives. A rest you, it can investigate you, it audits you, it can tax you for businesses. It's enormously important in terms of providing contracts, in terms of regulating fast sectors of the economy. So leaders just have enormous power to attack opposition and undermine their ability to compete in democratic system, which is why all modern democracies, the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries developed a series of measures that basically restricted the ability of politicians to politicize the state. They kind of created an arms length relationship between many of the bureaucrats who make core decisions that are important for everyday lives, like tax auditing and partisanship. And this was basically what kept democracy intact for the last century. And so this has begun to change. And this is the most important impediment to kind of creating an authoritarian regime. And this is why in countries like Hungary and Turkey and India, populists have come to power. And this has been, they first had to attack this sort of independent bureaucracy because it's the most important impediment to creating an authoritarian regime. So in many ways, as we say in the piece, these bureaucrats, their sort of unsexy bureaucrats are really on the front lines of preserving democracy today. Lookings absolutely right. And you're right that there is a blueprint for this that if in a competitive authoritarian regime, the way, if you can't ban your opponents, if you can't lock up your opponents, the logical weapon available is the state itself. You wield the state against your opponents. That can be done in a constitutional way. That doesn't, in most cases, violate the Constitution. That's all true. There is an established pattern. You could look at what Orban, what Ua Chavez, what Erdogan did and predict it. But there's another reason why the establishment ought not to have been shocked in 2024, 2025. Trump said he was going to do all of this. And the Republican Party has been clear, has been crystal clear since 2020, 2021, that it is willing to acquiesce to, if not support, an authoritarian project. I'm not exaggerating. Donald Trump tried to overturn the results of the 2020 election and block a peaceful transfer of power and the Republican Party decided to nominate him for president again. Donald Trump promised to do with a partial exception of the Doge stuff. Promise to do every single one of the things that he's doing, lawsuits against the press, wielding the IRS and the Justice Department against the opponents. He told us he's going to do this. So how the establishment was shocked that this is going on, quite frankly, is beyond me. You said it's beyond me. I mean, I was going to ask you, Steve, why do you think that Americans, and even some observers of the United States, it's such a hard time, envisioning this. One thing you say in your piece is that some elements of this have happened in US history before. For instance, Nixon politicized the IRS to go after his political enemies. You give the example of the Jim Crow South where to put it generously, law enforcement actors, turned a blind eye to really serious efforts to prevent black citizens to vote and therefore tilted the electoral playing field in their favor. And yet you present this period as really different and also, and I wonder what you think maybe the closest example is if people are really struggling to fire up their imaginations or if that's even what's needed, why is it so hard? You know, it is true that some of this we've seen before, I mean, I'll be the most obvious example as Richard Nixon in the 1970s, but I also think it's really important to understand that we are in a completely different era than we were in the 1970s. You know, Nixon resigned in 1974 because he knew that Republican senators would convict him after his impeachment by the House. None of this is the case now. Trump faces literally no restrictions on his activity. There's really sort of no checks on his power, which is quite different from what it's been in the past. And I think basically part of what's going on is one that's just, you know, I think that in the United States, we just have not experienced this in the modern era and there was a kind of false sense of complacency that was created by the failure of Trump in his first term, which I think he failed because the context was quite different than as we've just talked about. And I also think it's similar to with vaccines right now. There's sort of a lot of the opposition to vaccines is a function that people have never experienced. Measles, they've never experienced a lot of these polio and horrible diseases. So they're kind of complacent and they're, you know, on one's take vaccines. And I think it's because, you know, no one's experience, this kind of authoritarianism before that they sort of figure can't happen to them. And so I think, you know, as a result of this complacency, but also sort of active support on the part of the Paul Comparti, we're in a kind of particularly dangerous moment right now. That's a, that's an excellent point, but it's worse than that. It's as if not only people not experienced polio or measles, but we act as if it never happened in the United States before. So one reason why we're in the mess that we're in in terms of public expectations and the public's inability to come to grips with what's happening is that Americans have a really strong tendency to whitewash our past, right? Most Americans don't know or think about reconstruction. Most Americans have never thought about the fact that the U.S. South was under single party authoritarian rule for 80 years. We don't think about the fact that the red scares and McCarthyism were serious violations of civil liberties. And then we were by by contemporary measures by mainstream cadets, pre measures, not a full democratic regime until 1965 in this country. So if we took seriously some of the democratic deficits that we had in the past, it might be easier to come to terms. One other point though, this is unusual territory. No democracy even remotely as rich or as old as U.S. democracies ever broken down. No democracy over the age of 50s ever die, ever. And even if you take the birth date of U.S. democracy is 1965, we're above 50. And so old risk democracies never die. And that's another reason for complacency. Yeah, so if you look at a lot of the social scientists who rely on historical data, basically, say there's a zero percent chance of democratic breakdown in the United States, which is just patently ridiculous. I mean, it is really, Stephen and I have talked about this a lot. This is really a kind of in many ways a stunning failure of political science to really not predict this at all. And I think we're still kind of grappling with that. So you talk about, and to be a bit reductive, people must redress a, but kind of three ways sequentially that authoritarian figures that rise to the top of a democratic regime transform this regime into something. And it's really important to stress, I think that you're talking about United States becoming effectively a different regime form. And you're really trying to say this is happening. It's already happening. We're in the middle of it. And we really need to grapple with that. And those three ways are first the weaponization of the bureaucracy by prosecuting, using the law, defamation suits, lawsuits, investigations of opposition groups, and to tilt the playing field, such that it still looks like there is a game, but you can't play it fairly. And then, of course, doing this purge of the civil service and putting in loyalists. But the third component that I think there's some attention on, but maybe not enough, is co-optation, so not only negative pressure that an authoritarian will put on their opponents and critics, but using the state, using the bureaucracy to create inducements to comply for business, for anybody who might be opposed to the regime. Can you walk us through a little bit how that works and give us an example or two of another country in which that's been an effective way to consolidate a party's advantage? Yeah, so I think one useful place to start is by looking at the media sector in the United States. The first initial competitive authoritarianism has really been felt most clearly in the media. And the problem really comes down to the fact that in the modern economy in the United States, media companies are part of larger conglomerates that have interests in a wide variety of areas, aerospace, and Amazon, and others that are deeply affected by federal decision making. As a result, these companies are incredibly vulnerable to pressure by Trump. But more broadly, the ways in which business can benefit from good relations with Trump have convinced a massive number of businesses to go in and openly alive with the Trump administration. Michelle Goldberg called this and we've got this in the piece, the great compissulation. And this is hugely disturbing. And I think what you've seen is what Timothy Snyder calls obedience in advance. So even before Trump came to power, they were already sort of lining up behind Trump. And I think the most immediate impact we'll see is these number of settlements made between ABC and very likely CBS, also, and also a meta that are almost certainly going to result in kind of a kind of self-censorship by the media and sort of mitigation of criticism of the Trump administration during this term. So I actually find that that is something that is already occurring right now. These are settlements of defamation suits that the companies almost certainly would have won. But because their parent companies had other economic interests that play, they could be threatened by the Trump administration. They decided to settle, which is a major concession by the media in terms of shrinking the space for a repress. We'll be back after a short break. It's not enough to have data. You need to know how to use it. Transform data into actionable insights with a four course graduate certificate and competitive business intelligence from Georgetown University. You'll explore benchmarking strategies, communication tactics, business intelligence, and big data analytics through this 12 credit program. Later, those credits can be applied to our 33 credit master's degree and applied intelligence. Learn more or apply at scs.dorchedown.edu slash big data. music Did you know that foreign affairs has an app customizable settings allowed readers to listen to professionally narrated audio articles create playlists, save your favorite articles, resize text, read a night mode, and more just search for foreign affairs in your app store and start reading wherever you are. Download the app today. So, you know, the remarkable thing about your piece is that between when we finalize the text and when Trump came into office in his first couple of weeks, a whole lot of the things that you described. So, an effort to fire mass numbers of civil servants, various types of threats against the media capitulation, new capitulations by media organizations have occurred. Is there anything in this template of competitive authoritarianism that you've considered in other countries context that we haven't seen yet, but that you expect will be coming. Yeah, well, one thing I worry a lot about and what you see not in all competitive authoritarian regimes, but in some competitive authoritarian regimes is the use of political thuggery, threats of violence, gangs, militias, armed groups, sometimes heavily armed, sometimes not, but the use of political intimidation on the ground to silence civil society actors and to threaten politicians. And they do it shielded by the judiciary, so they engage in illegal behavior, nowhere is it legal to, you know, go beat up opposition at rallies. But if the attorney general or the prosecutors or the justice department give you a wink and turn up a willing to turn a blind eye which often happens in competitive authoritarian regimes, then these guys get a certain free rank. They get a blank check to engage in intimidation politics. That seems far-fetched, but it is precisely what happened in the US South during and after reconstruction. And given that the US already has a large and armed extremist fringe given that the level of threats against politicians and judges and prosecutors is already skyrocketed in recent years. And particularly given the huge wink that Donald Trump gave by pardoning almost all of the January 6th insurrectionists, that's something that we see another competitive authoritarian regimes that I think could easily happen here and is quite terrifying. Yeah, you know, competitive authoritarian regimes sort of align not just on the formal agents, the police and the like, but on sort of football clubs and other other kind of vigilantes to sort of be a protestorism by the kind of a veneer of plausible deniability to the regime. And this is kind of stuff that as Steve mentioned already kind of infects the system, it's as we mentioned in the piece, probably explains why some Republicans opposed impeachment after in 2021 when the grounds for impeachment were just ugly. Obviously, I would add that we're sort of now almost in this period. We can talk about this, the Democratic parties in some ways kind of shell shocked, you know, there really hasn't been an opposition, you know, at least on the and as a result, I think partly, you know, that's kind of kept violence down because there hasn't been kind of a first opposition. But when it does emerge, I think we're going to see much more of this kind of vigilante violence. I want to talk about Democrats because that's a big focus, the end of your piece or opposition, let's say, but first Republicans, a lot of people that I talked to seem to be putting a lot of hope in the possibility of an emerging over time Republican opposition. So, intra-group, let's take the resignation of Danielle Sussun, the acting US attorney for the Southern District of New York, former clerk for Antonin Scalia. She stepped down rather than follow this very abnormal request to dismiss charges against the New York mayor as a quid pro quo. And people can kind of lift these up and say, well, at some point, you know, Trump's own party, they're just going to have had enough. They're going to think this won't work for us in the long term, electorally, you know, and they'll break with him. Based on your experience looking at other contemporary competitive authoritarian regimes, is this something to hold out for? I mean, I think this is certainly, if you look at the breakdown of competitive authoritarian regimes, it very often happens from within the ruling coalition. And I mean, I certainly hope that's right. I think both Stephen and I can see by Stephen shaking his head, quite skeptical that this is going to happen. I mean, the career costs to people doing this is just so enormous. You look at sort of Cheney and Kinsey Jern, what they've had to go through these are two Republican cragile say came out in opposition to Trump. It's just kind of hard to imagine that many would follow that path. And I think it's basically, if you look at other competitive authoritarian regimes, they've really had large-scale defections or mass defections from the ruling coalition. When the government is incredibly unpopular when there's sort of the sense that there's a danger to one's career and sort of livelihood by sort of remaining loyal, right? And right now, you know, very far from that in the United States. I just find it really hard to imagine. There have been a lot of the young students since 2016. There have been a dripage of principled conservatives who've stood up for the rule of law and stood up for the Constitution, stood up for democracy. And as looking pointed out, every single one of them has seen their, at least their immediate careers prospects completely destroyed. As long as that's the case, as long as it's highly likely that opposition internal opposition to Trump will be a career killer. You cannot expect large numbers of Republicans to do it. And in fact, the over-dome window continues to shift in an authoritarian direction, right? It was unthinkable in early 2021. It was unthinkable to allow cash Patel to take a major position in the administration. Now it looks like he's going to be a FBI director. This is a party that has completely Trumpized. And if Trump were to become highly unpopular, then he will suffer defections. But as long as Trump is the most popular Republican, as long as he is more popular within Republican ranks than anyone who opposes him, you're not going to see defection. And I think we're far from it. In your piece, one of the things that distinguishes the US may be a little bit from some other some other competitive authoritarian regimes is the degree of political polarization and the sort of stasis of party identification. And in one sense, that's a bit protective. You talk about how much damage and how much change a person with an 80% approval rate riding in can do. And you know that one of the potential sources of resilience in the United States is that Trump is, I think, covering just below 50 and can't barely crack that number. He doesn't have that level of support. But on the other hand, it seems very, very difficult for him to drop to 20, 15% as you see in some other places because of this just incredible rigidity of this two party system. Give us a quick picture. So let's say come 2028, presuming that Trump does not find a way to give himself a third term. He can't redo the constitution. So he he can't run again. It's a competitive election between Democrats and Republicans for both branches of the Congress and the executive, given what could be entrenched of Trump's authoritarian aims over the next four years, how might that feel different that election, that type of democratic experience, then it did even for us in 2024? It'll depend on a number of things. First of all, will there be a level of sort of grassroots intimidation of voters and election workers? We could be an environment where that remains relatively rare, like in recent elections, or that could be stepped up. You know, the Trump administration could make it clear that voter intimidation tactics, maybe not quite as violent as the 1870s in the US South, but voter intimidation tactics are are encouraged or allowed, that that could change the vote. And the other thing we don't know is just how much the government's use of carrots and sticks in terms of economic and regulatory policy, just how much of the private sector's arm the government's going to be able to twist. So my expectation, and I hope I'm right, my expectation is despite the co-optation and the bullying of a large number of CEOs and wealthy Americans, there will still be a fair number of wealthy Americans willing to finance Gavin Newsom or Josh Shapiro, whomever the Democratic Party candidate is. But it's at this point, not impossible, not even that difficult to imagine a world where anybody, any individual, any upper middle class American, thinking about writing a check to a Democratic candidate has to think twice because maybe it's going to increase the likelihood of an IRS audit. We're pretty sure the playing field's going to tilt a little bit. We're not sure how much. My guess I'm still fairly optimistic that that we have a big and wealthy enough private sector, a big and wealthy enough upper middle class that it's not going to make the election non-competitive, but we it's it's impossible, at least for me, to anticipate just how far that level of intimidation and co-optation is going to go. I mean, I think another way of putting it is I think both of us are quite confident that there'll be a lot of abuse and efforts to sort of intimidate the opposition. I think that's, you know, I'd be very surprised if that's not happened, you know, if we did not live in a world in which people just think twice about sort of going into the opposition to the Trump administration. But I think we're a little bit more optimistic as whether that intimidation will be successful. And actually, waking in any dramatic way, the Democratic Party, I think that one of the core differences between the United States and places like Hungary and Turkey is that we're just a much more developed capitalist economy. Wealth is far more distributed across society. The legal system is much stronger. The institutions are much stronger. So really, it's much harder for even someone like Trump who's, you know, the ignoble autocrat and basically willing to almost do anything to be successful. So I think we have to distinguish between sort of his abuse of power versus the impact of that abuse of power. You do right very insightfully in in a complex way about how the many facets on which opposition can become innovated and exhausted and overwhelmed and unfocused, particularly I was struck by this line in your piece, the depletion of societal opposition to authoritarianism may be worse than it appears in any given time already. We can observe when key political players sideline themselves when politicians retire when university presidents resign. But it is harder to see the opposition that might have materialized in a less threatening environment, but never did. The young lawyers who decide not to run for office, the countless citizens who decide not to join a protest and so on. I want you to talk about sources of optimism, hope and how a good opposition might organize itself to preserve the United States democratic culture. Do you notice any of this weariness in yourself or in people you know? Right. There's a mix of fear and exhaustion and resignation. In some cases, just your pragmatism that different mixes for different people, but there are a number of forces, a number of emotional forces pushing us toward the sideline. You know, in my case, I feel like there are many times each day, I think to myself, I spent eight years doing this and for what, right? For what? And it is exhausting. And then to get back to your point, if when you see other people around you, people who are more powerful, wealthier, better positioned, better able to defend themselves than you are. Jeff Bezos is in a much better position than I am. When I see Jeff Bezos and Mark Zuckerberg getting on their knees. And when you see newspapers folding and CEOs who you know know better, politicians who you know know better surrendering, it can be paralyzing, it can be debilitating, it's hard to get up at a bed in the morning and continue to fight for democracy. When you know Jeff Bezos and his billions have given up. And this collective action problem that we have is that each individual has, each individual civil society leader, every university president, every CEO, every editor, every parent company of a major media outlet has to take care of their shareholders, their university, make sure that they don't face frivolous lawsuits that can be costly, that they don't face investigations, tax charges, they've got to take care of themselves in their organizations. And there's a strong tendency when you're worried about the bottom line when there are maybe billions of dollars at stake or a down-in tax coming or a costly defamation suit coming or an investigation coming, there are strong incentives to just, okay you know I'm going to take care of myself, I'm just going to step to the sideline for a year or two. But when everybody does that, the democracy movement overall civil society overall is badly weakened. How does a person resist some of these very powerful forces because there is a depiction in your piece, this state is like a Titanic, it's a gigantic mechanism that carries a tremendous weight against it and the senses that every individual would have a hard time swimming against that current. Have you seen anything thus far that's giving you specific optimism? Well I think it's important to emphasize that there's more opposition now going on than sort of many of us appreciate, you know I think there's a lot of it's being done through the legal system, the 19 Attorney Generals who filed suit against the various actions by Doge and Moss. Still very early days, I just want to emphasize that it's still very early days. And it's early days in two ways, one that the legal process is kind of working itself out. But it's also early days in terms of we haven't yet seen the full impact of Trump's behavior. And I think that's where I think some of my biggest optimism comes in the fact that you know people like Trump are just very bad at governing and at dealing with sort of core problems that people care about, like the economy and national security or sort of or airplanes not running into each other and things like that. So I think that his kind of fire hose of firing officials and stuff is almost certainly going to lead to a variety of catastrophic outcomes and increases popularity. But also sort of I think kind of wake a lot of the population up in terms of reviving their outrage at this activity. And so I think that is I do hope that this kind of sense of malaise that we're seeing in this kind of passivity is potentially short-lived. There is a pervasive allegation by Trump himself and by Musk and by Vance and by prominent American Republicans who are now in power that what they are doing in fact is undoing the Democrats weaponization of the state. That it was the left that was the Democrats you know Barack Obama weaponized the IRS. So many allegations on this front. How do you think about that if you do? How do you, how does one grapple with that counter claim? So what I do is I look to Freedom House reports or other international organizations whose job it is to measure democracy and authoritarianism. If they're not reporting that the Democrats weaponized the state and that both parties are assaulting Democratic institutions. Don't take G.D. Vance's word for it. Find a reputable organization or a reputable scholar of political regimes who claims that there was a weaponization of the state systematic weaponization of this comparable weaponization of the state under previous Democratic administrations. And then all then we can talk seriously. Until then, this is consistent with what virtually all authoritarians do when they purge the state. You have to justify purging and packing the state. I mean Trump may be willing to just say he wants to do it but it's a pretty illegitimate thing to come in and fire people left and right and replace them with hacks. You need to justify it and authoritarians when they weaponize the state invariably almost without exception claim that the state has been somehow subverted or infiltrated by dangerous elements of some sort. Right to give you an example, I mean sort of Victor Orban and Hungary, he came to power again second time in 2010 and immediately made the argument that the state was controlled by communists from the 1980s which was just patently false but that was his sort of excuse for undertaking a major attack on the independent bureaucracy. This is again from the same playbook really that autoclads you see in Steve says in other cases. I think you just have to look like where are those claims made? If they're only made on Fox News or by leaders of the public important that you can pretty much dismiss them. Another question for you, what will be the evidence? There's an effort to create an authoritarian system out of the United States government. What will be the evidence that the United States that its opposition that its culture is dealing with this relatively well-compartively and that it's not? What would the former look like? So one thing, I think in a sense a constitutional crisis is a relatively better outcome. On the sense that if you see actual courts not accepting Trump's actions as legal, I mean that is already kind of a healthy outcome. It still may end up being that Trump, I mean the thing that I worry more than I when we first wrote this article was that Trump could just decide to ignore the law at all and just sort of engage in this activity. But I still think that some kind of resistance or some kind of constitutional crisis is actually to me an optimistic outcome in some ways. Word of faith right now where the only people willing to stand up to Trump or Danielle Sassoon and the minister who spoke to Trump in D.C. about mercy. But when it becomes first acceptable and second eventually cool to stand up to Trump will be in a better place. And I think that there's a good chance that that will happen. US democracy for all of its incredible weaknesses, dysfunction and vulnerabilities is going to be hard to kill outright. There's a lot of opposition out there. It would probably take a self goal by Trump, a mistake or two, by Trump and that will happen for there be a little blood in the water. And once there's a little blood in the water, I think you'll see greater opposition. I think this is quite quite likely to happen. I mean, I would just add to that. I mean, you saw this incredibly depressing, great capitulation of a bunch of the business sector almost immediately after Trump was elected. These are not loyal people to Trump. The minute they put their finger in the wind and things are blowing away from Trump, I could easily imagine these people abandoning them just as quickly as they went to him. Steven, once that's a very temptation for the opposition in competitive authoritarian regimes to lose itself a little bit or lose its commitments by feeling that now the game theory has changed. The playing field has changed and has to imitate the originator of an authoritarian culture. Yeah, look, it's really hard. Oppositions, you see this over and over again, whether it's Venezuela or Hungary or Poland for a while or Turkey, oppositions are widely criticized from the outside by themselves, they question themselves because it's a couple of things. First of all, it's hard. I mean, the thing about an uneven playing field is if you're in the opposition, you're going uphill. It's hard to compete. That's why it's competitive authoritarianism and not democracy. It's hard to compete against an incumbent government that's wielding machinery, government against opponents. Secondly, in many of these cases, certainly in the United States, the incumbent has rapidly and unexpectedly changed the rules of the game. Politicians in both parties, but particularly the Democratic Party, have been doing politics the same way their whole life. I mean, maybe they learned how to tweet in the last decade, but Schumer's been doing politics long time. Nancy Pelosi's been doing politics a long time. The entire Democratic Party's leadership knows one way of doing politics and politics are changing on a number of dimensions. Some of some are authoritarian. Others just have to do with the changes in media technology, the attention economy. So there's a lot of change going on. And when that change is going on and you're fighting an uphill battle, that leads to a lot of self doubt. There will be a lot of criticism, a lot of self criticism, a lot of debate, a lot of debate that may seem like needless debate. I'm not sure that's a necessarily a terrible thing. Democrats do need to learn how to adapt to politics in the 2020s. They may have to engage in a little more attention economy politics. They may have to get on Rogan a bit more or whatever. But there will be a more serious debate. And there is a more serious debate about how dirty should the Democrats play? Should they be willing to play hardball against or even engage in authoritarian behavior against Trump? That's a very, very difficult set of questions, but it is a set of questions that oppositions everywhere had to figure out, okay, you know, what do we cross these lines to? Do we take off the gloves? Do we cheat? Do we bend the rules? Do we play hardball? Those are difficult set of choices that the Democrats are going to party has to make. And there's no clear answer. Stephen, look, in your piece had a granular pressures that I think was born of really deep comparative thinking and offered a really, really different and deeper take on a very extensively covered moment and future. So thank you so much for joining us. It was great to speak with you. Thanks for having us on. Thank you for listening. You can find the articles that we discussed on today's show at ForeignAferors.com. The ForeignAferors interview is produced by Julia Fleming-Dresser, Molly McEnany, Ben Metzner, and Caroline Wilcox. Our audio engineer is Todd Yeager. Our theme music was written and performed by Robin Hilton. Make sure you subscribe to the show wherever you listen to podcasts. And if you like what you heard, please take a minute to rate and review it. We release a new show every other Thursday. Thanks again for tuning in."}