{"Episode Name": "CutTheCLutter: BJP\u2019s CM in Delhi, end of rift with L-G & triple-engine govt | DK Singh & Neelam Pandey join in", "Podcast Name": "The Print - Cut the Clutter", "Episode Link": "https://theprint.podbean.com/e/cuttheclutter-bjp-s-cm-in-delhi-end-of-rift-with-l-g-triple-engine-govt-dk-singh-neelam-pandey-join-in/", "duration": "38:24", "text": " If you would like to have something beautiful here, furnaceIKOR though be sure to be free. Take a cream can do it for your flakes. Let them go. corners I'm just using cutting Top Hot Carale adolescents. This is the right time, yeah. Soldier is a nice time. Protestant musician is a very nice way to pay attention to it. This is the right time. Off-som-zah. Mutual Fund investments are subject to market risks. Redol scheme related documents carefully. In Decca Gupta now, Delhi has a new chief minister and your award. The BJP has its first Delhi Chief Minister, Up at 27 years. 1998 that is when the first term after Delhi got its assembly and the first election was held in which the BJP won elections. That term of that assembly ended and the BJP Chief Minister in that case, the third Chief Minister within the term of the same assembly. That was a little bit shambolic for the BJP in Delhi, which the party considers to be its guard as we say in political analysis or a fortress. Or a citadel. So they had three chief ministers, Madalal Khurana was the first chief minister, elected Chief Minister. Then he got caught in Narsimaras. That was the Narsimaras where I was by the way. He got caught in Narsimaras, Havala's camp. So he left. Then then came Chagriz Sahib Singh, Sib Singh, Housan, Travish Marma was now one of the candidates and has just been sworn in a minister. He was a candidate for Chief Minister and third Sushma Swaraj. When it looked like Sib Singh had become quite unpopular towards the very end. Sushma Swaraj was brought in. She only served for 52 days. That if you might remember, was the Onion election. Onion prices had gone up and that's when India News TV discovered a story called Onion. Since then, Indian News TV has never given up that story. Even October November, thereabouts are around time, it's off season for Onion and prices are going up every year. You will find the same story comes up. Nevertheless, 27 years. Because what happened after that? After that came Shila Dixit. Shila Dixit became a very popular chief minister for Congress parties, served three terms and was popular until the last year. The combination of many things, particularly India against corruption. And even before that, Armin Kajriwal, who then had it a bunch of activist NGOs. Parimartan and some others in Delhi. They had been attacking Shila Dixit consistently. And that had been undermining her credibility. Then came India against corruption. Then the nearby case in Delhi. All of that Commonwealth came up to 2010. And all of those were then used by Armin Kajriwal to have Shila Dixit defeated. I didn't say to defeat Shila Dixit because the first election in 2013, Armin Kajriwal's party got a lot of seats. Shila Dixit might have lost power. She got defeated. But Armin Kajriwal's party up was not the largest party. The BJP was the largest party yet. The BJP could not form a government because nobody would come with it. So Congress party, which had been dismantled in Delhi by Amabhi party, they decided to keep the BJP out. They decided to support the Amabhi party. That government lasted about 49 days. You remember that chief minister then Kajriwal resigned on the pretext that General Paul Bill had not been passed. Right? At that, the martial you all see activists of Amabhi party bringing in quilts to Jantar Mantar in the thick of winter. And pretending to sleep there, etc. Then in the follow up elections, Amabhi party came with this massive sweep where Congress party was wiped out. Congress party in the process has never touched the double figure marks since they're not for seats. Seats have actually been zero, but not even for both percentage. That is how Delhi's politics changed and how dramatically it altered. You can see in the fact that in a city where the BJP was traditionally very strong. And one of the reasons it was very strong is that as the exchange of population took place following the partition. A lot of Delhi's Muslims left. The exchange of population from Delhi was very, very comprehensive. It wasn't as total as in Punjab. In Punjab, in fact, you might need to, you might not need more than the fingers of two hands to count number of people. The exchange of state-state back in India. Mama-graphi, Sahibwadir, Dharmi, a few like that. And not many more. That transfer of population was very total. In Delhi, it wasn't that comprehensive, but quite, quite, quite comprehensive still. Muslim population, which was 33% of Delhi before partition now came down to 6% in fact. If you look at the numbers today, it will be about 12%, 13%, but that's also because people from many other parts of the country, particularly Eastern parts of the country. Bihar, Eastern UP, this Bengal, they've come in in search of jobs in to Delhi. In fact, you will find a lot of them in Eastern Delhi across the Jumna or Eastern parts of Delhi, South Eastern parts of Delhi. Even this site of Jumna, for example, the Ocla area. And the number of Punjabi's, which used to be much fewer earlier, that came to be about 30% of Delhi. 30% of Punjabi's in Delhi also include Punjabi 6, Khatri 6. Most of them, most of them are refugees who came from Pakistan. That's why all of Western Delhi, that's why Virat Khali, Shikhar Davan, Virindar Sabbal, all the reason why Punjabi is a Jumna. There are a lot of these Delhi aggressive Delhi stars, they come from West Delhi, and most of them are children of the refugee families. Punjabi refugee families. That's where the BJP was very strong. And because the BJP was very strong in the Punjabi refugee population, even in the first election that was held in Delhi, 1952, Delhi used to have escaped assembly then until 1955, until it was abolished, that itself is a story. In that first election also, Jana Sank had got five seats, but at that time, hardly anybody knew Jana Sank, National Emperor in Delhi, they had shown their presence. Again, to give you just a little bit of understanding of how significant it was that the BJP was out of power in Delhi for 27 years and has now come back with a very large majority. Again, we have to understand that by the Delhi assembly was abolished. Again, after fights between the Chief Minister, Congress leader, Jana Sank, Congress leader, Chawri, Bramprakash, between him and the Chief Administrator at that point, Anand Pandit, the designation then was Chief Commissioner, which had come in from British era. Left-man governor came in later. So, it was Chief Commissioner, there were fights between the elected Chief Minister and the Chief Commissioner. After that, the National, at the National level states, the Organization Commission report came in, and that recommended partly also influenced by this fight in Delhi, the Chief Commissioner, Chief Minister, fight that Delhi did not deserve to be a state or to have a state assembly. So, Delhi in that case became like a centrally administered bureaucratically administered body. That went on for some time, until more committees were formed, they were demerced to democratize Delhi in 1955. So, briefly after Chawri, Bramprakash, Satsadhar, Gormuknehalsing, who was a well-known figure in our National Politics for a very long time. He became Chief Minister of Delhi and then Delhi lost its state children. That's how it remained. The only thing that changed was that Chief Commissioner's office was elevated to left-man governor and then a string of ICES office. The string of ICES officers served as left-man governors of Delhi. That went on and they were demands for statehood or some democracy. By 1966, now in Raghandis government, it was considered that Delhi will have not an assembly but something called a Metropolitan Council. In that Metropolitan Council, the first elections were held in 1966 and who won that election? Now, that is also not a time that Jamsar in our history, but the Congress party was so powerful because Congress party was beginning at this point. 1967, the Congress party lost a bunch of states to have to a ragtag alliance of opposition parties. Miss Gandhi was very deep now. Nevertheless, in 1966, the Jamsang which is a parent of which is the parent of the party. They won that election. A.A. and Jha, another distinguished ICES officer was the left-man governor. That first metropoditing council, the chairman, the elected chairman was who else but L.K. at Bani, a large Christian at Bani. And who was the Chief Executive Counselor which is like the equivalent of what the Chief Minister might be that that was Vijay Kumar Malhotra. Both of them rose to be mixed all words of the Jamsan first and then the BJP in Delhi and also nationally. Similarly, another leader who rose alongside was Madal Khurana who became the first Chief Minister of Delhi. Once Delhi got its full state assembly, the earlier one was a Metropolitan Council. In fact, a figure who was very familiar in Delhi from the Metropolitan Council days is Jack Proveitian, the Congress party. Who was also the Chief Executive Counselor. So, having given you all of this, Ghan now, I bring in the real Gani which is D.K. Singh, he is sitting here with me. So, D.K. will tell us the significance of this. And also, also political nuances of what has happened and what does it mean. And also, particularly, I would like to ask you D.K. or Whole Fourth on BJP special talent in grooming people in student politics or lower level functional level RSS politics and bringing them up to the top. So, BJP to that extent has a much better HR policy than say the Congress party. And once we are done with it, we will be joined in by Dila Pandey because another complexity. This is Kattra Clutter. So, another bit of Clutter, persistent Clutter in the case of Delhi is who owns which part of Delhi? What I mean is who governs which part of Delhi and how? Because that is the real spaghetti bowl or a dog's breakfast. And that is something that gets even more complicated. If the central government is the one party and the state government is with another and particularly if they are very hostile to each other, Sheila Dikshit managed it in an era where Wajpay and Advani were more accommodative. Sheila Dikshit was more skillful and they wasn't a constant state of war. However, the last 10 years have been the exact opposite of that. So, to explain those complexities, how to declutter that jumble of facts will also be joined in by Nila Pandey, who has been covering Delhi politics and Delhi government very closely for many years. So, Dikshit back to you now. See, HR policy you have often discussed it in your city say episodes. It has been pretty strong and we have seen we have so many new phrases. And now, Sajamaya Rastha nobody expected. You know we expected somebody like Beple of Dik, who is interpret. Yeah, but we interpret. And now you have like how go through those form an evianpy activist to becoming a counselor and now the chief minister. So, state after state you see this phenomenon and you were just discussing the D USU president and how to, you know the, an an SUI D USU president from the NSU, they have not really written much and we will discuss it. But from the A website, you have a very illustrious list. What we need to see in this the formation of this government is how the balance works now because they have got the, well first of my melee, now the chief minister. See, if you look at the list of six cabinet ministers only one that is a couple of mission has some administrative experience. He was water minister in the up government. The other five have no administrative experience if you discount the fact that you know they have worked out as heading the education committee in the, not the municipal corporation. And and as he showed was heading under the key committee that was in the, there was in the South, the municipal corporation. Otherwise, does have experience you would say. But then you have seen how, you know Modi and Sajamaya have been experimenting in Gujarat. You saw the entire cabinet being replaced. And again it's working as a smoothly as you could think of. So, here also, but then LG, we can actually expect LG are running it in fact indirectly. He was doing it anyway, he was doing it earlier also. But now they will be coordination and there are so many cases, you know because of lack of coordination up government have gone against the LG, against the center. Many a times that coordination was lacking. Now, we may soon be looking at a triple engine government. It's just double engine you have at the center in the state in the, in the UT. And now soon you will have the mayor selection. There are already you know the number of counselors after some defections from the defections by up, counselor, BGP is already having a, I mean having more counselors today. Whether we have operation, come out, who are there will be operation, come out, who are there. There will be operation, come out, anything, at the, now the government has informed you, you should be expecting more of it. So, you may expect the BGP have it to have its mayor now sooner than later on, say in April, you have a mayor, mayor election here. So, you will have mayor also, then we are talking about triple engine government. So, since you talked about these cases, I have a list with which, with Pura Mandani has given me of eight cases. It's Supreme Court which, which the outgoing, arm of the party government and filed against, against the central government essentially. And a couple of years ago, I was through the LG, and JT, but essentially against the central government, I will give the list to you as we go along. So, became a, BJP's HR policy because if I look at do so president's right, going back, if you start with 1974, 75, around JT, right. We all know where he rose and what he, he could have become if unfortunately, bad health had not taken him away cancer and not taken him away. So, he also pre-michodis, or when JT, then Vijay Guel, he also served in the Council of Ministers, central Council of Ministers. After that was Vijay Joli who's been quite, quite active and. And last, last year, he heard of Vijay Joli who was when he was doing that online campaign for Donald Trump. That's right. That's right. And that's right. As if the BJP was backing Donald Trump's, Donald Trump's. And he's a character, I remember after the nuclear tests, he held a big conference and constitutional club where I was also invited to speak. And I think he stood up there and he said, now, he said, now, he didn't rise that high in party politics. After that, you have some interesting names from Dusu because Dusu, I can see del Universe students union, that's been the cradle for much political talent. It helps to be in Delhi, Subhansha Mitta, again, of the BJP and RSS, key figure. So the Hansha Mitta. testing names from Dusu because Dusu, I can see Deyun University students union. That's been the cradle for much political talent. It helps to be in Delhi, so Dansha Mitha, again of the BJP and RSS, key figure. So Dansha Mitha, key figure in BJP and RSS, very close to Promote Mahajan. Ajay Makan of the Congress party, again a key leader who became a minister at the center. Al-Kalambha of the Congress, 95, 96, then to up, then back to Congress. And in fact Al-Kalambha posted this picture which you will see on your screen of herself and Dikobupa being sworn in together and one year. So you can see that Dusu has been a nursery for future political leadership. It seems to me that BJP people coming out of there have done much better than the Congress people. In fact, after Al-Kalambha, the only other name I see which is still a bit prominent is Raghni Naya called the Congress party NSUI, 1, 2,000, 4,000, 5,000, 3,4, 3,4,5, not in the talkers, 5,6 is Raghni Naya, then Amrita Dhavan, Amrita Bari and so on. And then you come to one more prominent name but again from the BJP, Nupo Sharma, who's been in trouble lately, we know for obvious reasons. And then some of the others who we might hear about as we go on in future because those are two reasons. So what is this thing about the BJP and student politics? They get, they're able to get these people from student politics, labour politics, the RSS, Pracharaks or Sub-Tracara clever and build them up. So that also tells us the nursery. Nastri is in fact the RSS. So we talk about AVQ that is the RSS is a student's wing. We have seen in several states, chief ministers, new chief ministers who appointed Bhai Modi Saaam, Sis Rutan-40, almost all of them, if we discount those who have come from other parties like say Pima Khan, to Himan Tavasya Sharma. Almost all of them came from the RSS. And the RSS is rather long and that's where the AVQ comes in the picture. So that nursery has been working very effectively. It was happening earlier also but now with Nain Modi at the helm, that has become the only recruitment, the equipment seller, I have to say. On the other hand I see so many NSWA people have won particularly from 2003 for onwards. But you don't hear of any of them. They all seem to have sort of with their domain. Ramun Gandhi if you remember way back in 2007 I guess when he became the ASL general secretary of youth commerce and the NSUI, he started talking about how he was to bring the youth into mainstream politics. And he wanted, he started the democratization exercise. So he started having the internal elections in SUI, youth commerce. And that was supposed to provide you fresh faces. So, bringing youngsters from NSUI youth congress to the top level of the party. That was what he talked about. I shocked how much was one of them. But I shocked how many years he started, he was already heading the youth congress. But he became very close to him. You see a few of them here and there, otherwise that is the same. I mean actually in a tragedy, suddenly stage they come back. She won the 2009 election in the 30th birthday. That was Ramun Gandhi's high point. His last high point. And now she is back as Telanna in charge, the VICC is charge of Telanna. But she was not discovered through that process. So in many states, she has the internal elections. These youngsters were to come up the party hierarchy. But how will it happen in very effective way? You see a few securit is here there. But not much. So I told you about these cases. I will briefly tell you about these cases. Then DK and I will talk politics for a couple more minutes. And then Neil and Bill join in. Also, we will go over the implications of these cases. One is the big one. It is a constitutional case. Supreme Court reputation. That is challenging the central governments change of law. Change of law as a national capital territory of Delhi, amendment act of 2023. This is where they took away a lot of the powers of the elected state government. That was still in the earlier looks above where the BGP had a root majority of its own. The effect of the legislation was brought barely eight, nine days after the Supreme Court had ruled in favor of the up government. The submission will be under the control of the elected government. And to get around that, the center changed the law. At that point, they had a root majority as I said. Second, who would be the chairperson of Delhi electricity regulatory commission? Now, DRC, you know, every state which has unbundled its electricity, the business, there is a regulatory commission that decides the tariff. So there was a fight over who would be the chairman. LG wanted a point somebody. Center appointed justice to say, the center went ahead and made a point of the AIS chairperson. Their up government was complaining that nobody even consulted them. They had no say in that point. So that case is pending. Then challenging the appointment of LG as the chair of the high level committee to oversee the cleaning of YAMNA. Now, that is a sole point with the LG as well. Let look, I was appointed chairperson of the committee to clean up the YAMNA and up went to Supreme Court and took a stay on that. Took an injunction. Now, you see the moment Arvind case rebal lost. You saw these machines coming up on the YAMNA, sucking up garbage and sucking up the mug there and people said, oh, if they didn't have so heavy the technology by, by the open up now. The problem is that earlier there was an injunction and now there is a presumption that the new government will go and withdraw all the cases. But see some of the other cases. So this is the appointment of LG as the chair of the high level committee over to oversee the cleaning of the YAMNA by the NGT. This was not a, not an appointment by the central government, but by the national green tribunal. So, Ama B. Partis government went to Supreme Court and had it stayed. Then the challenge the NGT order forming another committee for Delhi's solid waste management. That is to, that is to do something about this garbage mountains. Actually, if you want to check out, what is the tallest structures in Delhi? Delhi is a low rise city because everybody thought because the mumbled basha's rule here, they lived in low rise palaces and not, it's an all our top bureaucrats ministers, judges, they live in low rise zones. So, all of Delhi should be low rise. I'm being sarcastic. So, Delhi is a low rise city. There, what is the tallest structure? The tallest structure is not some 10 story apartment complex that may have been built say, say in some part of West Delhi or some part of distance out Delhi say in GK2 or the kutumina, the usual suspected tallest structures in Delhi, if you can call them structures, are the garbage mountains. To the north and north east of Delhi, in fact you go up on any of this apartment complexes and you see, oh wow. I never thought Delhi, Delhi, Delhi had mountains around it right and these ones are genuinely mountainside and sometimes particularly summer, you also see smokes coming out of this as used to happen in the Philippines and Manila at one point of time. So, a committee was set up to clean these up and there again and there again, the city had appointed LG the chair person. So, that also was enchanted. Then there was a matter pertaining to the appointment of lawyers for Delhi government and the lawyers, the Delhi government appointed and over fighting its cases, the same cases LG refused to, they say allegedly refused to release their payments. So, can you imagine what happens when what happens when lawyers are not paid? Sixth Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Rights approached the Supreme Court in 2022, challenging amendments to the juvenile justice act of 2015. So, in the process, Delhi was in a mess, Delhi was an orphaned city because one parent of Delhi was the chief minister, the other parent of Delhi was the LG, the grandparent of Delhi was the central government in the middle of all of them who were fighting two on one side, one of the other. Delhi had been orphaned. That excuse now has gone away. DK, am I right to say that? Yeah, I am sure the, the new government will be withdrawing all these petitions. But, but at the same time, off will complain that see, you can, you cannot say that we did not do all this work, we were not allowed to. So, you talk about Brown precaution, how you had a fight with the un-pundance. So, look at all the governments, I mean, electoral governments, not the metropolitan council, but even, you know, after 93 when the assembly came in place. Everybody, when Madalal Karana became the chief minister, he had issues with the Piquet away. Even, Sheila Dix, yes, she did have a very good relationship with the total way of us paying. But, she had issues with her energies. Once she went for building bylaws, I think she had issues with her, you know, no, then I think it was BL, JOC. Then there was this change in the circle rate of properties here. They see her issues with the, I think, there is no, there is no kana. But, not very, there were disagreements, but it was not that bad. And there was no bitterness and, and there was no bitterness. And there was no bitterness. So, now this should go, but yes, Lakehaguptha, I am sure she is not going to be assertive right from day one. She will let, uh, success in a, done the administration the way he has been doing. a, not will success, you know, give her trouble. Of course, she will not, because once you have the political leadership in place and she had been chosen by the party, I command. So, I mean, so I will be, I mean, so of course, like he runs, he was truly done steadily. Now, he will be overseeing the entire thing very closely. Yeah. So, we do not really see any rift happening now. So, thanks for changing. So, she will excuse his or gone. So, now, now that he says, who will be governing Delhi and how, and that this will be a a trip and engine, engine government, let us try and understand how does Delhi work. And for that, Nila Pandey will join in now. Nila, now that there will be triple engines are car, right, assuming that everything goes all right, all excuses are gone. It is still quite complex to govern Delhi. So, tell us something about this complexity. Yeah, as you rightly said, you know, as far as Delhi is concerned and when it comes to governance, it is a very complex region. So, if you look at the national capital territory of Delhi, you have three local bodies. So, you have new Delhi municipal council, you have municipal corporation of Delhi and then you have the Kenton men board. So, if we look at new Delhi municipal council, well, it has only around 3 percent of area under it. Largely, the land is owned by the central government. You have diplomatic and plays. You have Latin's Delhi as it is called. First of the land belongs to the 80 percent of the land. So, to speak, belongs to the central government and NDMC reports directly to the home minister with the center. You then have the municipal corporation of Delhi. So, this includes Jourberg, Gaulflings, Hamrata, Shird Gilma, Kharmarket, Hanma, Hanma, Kharmarket, yes. Bhabha, Baba, Baba, Roo, all of these. Well, the municipal corporation of Delhi which was trifocated in 2012 by Sheila Dixit, the Denshi Minister. It was then unified again and now currently there is an executive wing of the municipal corporation and the legislative wing. As far as the executive wing is concerned, the commissioner is the main boss, so to speak. And the mayor is responsible for the house. There are 250 Councillors under the municipal corporation of Delhi. But if you really have to say who is the main person who has all the authority, then it is the chairperson of the standing committee which is the all power committee which takes all decision related to property tax, professional tax, parking lots that are there in Delhi. Anything related to Delhi, any decision related to Delhi is largely. Parking in a big city is a very big issue and parking charge is a big thing. The honoural trump now is trying to use executive powers to change the parking norms and laws in New York City. How that will work given the federal structure there and the city governance or tournament of city governance we do not know. But parking, parking of parking fees is an important thing for voters. Yes, yes. And every year we hear stories about the movement, municipal corporation of Delhi decides to hike parking charges. You see these stories all over newspaper. Well why it is right now because it is not a triple engine so far. You have the Amami party at the municipal level. Why is there going to be a challenge for the BJP or as well as for the Amami party if you look at maintenance of road construction of road, the smaller roads which are 60 feet and less they come under MCD. The bigger one come, they fall under the control of the Delhi government. The pre-lub duty. The primary schools are the responsibility of these and the media. So every time you hit by a portal last five several years lots of portals have come. So you have to think about who should you curse when you hit a portal arch. So do you curse MCD or do you curse Delhi government. But there are portals everywhere at the fact that previous 15 years Delhi had forgotten the portals. This is more recent thing. Right. So as I was pointing out that primary education again it is under the purview of the municipal corporation. Secondary education is under the Delhi government. As far as sanitation is concerned again the MCD. But when it comes to dis-silting of roads which is always a major problem during monsoon then it is divided between the PWD and the MCD. So the list is long. We always see this multiplicity of authorities becoming a major excuse between the elected government as well as the musical corporation where no one is willing to take charge of the situation and they always indulge in blame game. So this is something that may become a problem because right now we have the Ammani party at the municipal level and the BJP at the Delhi government. Well that said even if it was sort of from the BJP's point of view the perfect word and they took control of MCD also. Given this multiplicity of structures it is always possible to blame somebody else for what is being messed up. Portola as well as responsible power is not coming so it is responsible. Now Nila in this one how does NDNC work? That is a peculiar thing and I know I would say that almost every country the big democracies that you know usually they keep their capital national capital region protected even in America it is not a state it is a district of Columbia. In Pakistan for example Islamabad is national capital region it is not a part of Punjab. I also know because there was one particular minister, federal minister who belong to Punjab who had serious criminal cases filed against him in Pakistan if Punjab but Punjab police could not comment arrest him in Islamabad because he was in their territory. But to go to the airport in Islamabad here to pass through five kilometres of Punjab. So whenever he had to take a flight he would take a helicopter and land at the airport and then carry on. So these are complex things. Now in this one the most privileged part of India the most privileged real estate the best roads the best electricity the best everything the best gardens is the NDMC zone. How is that double? Well as far as the NDMC is concerned you have the chair person whose the authority and the chair person is appointed by the centre in consultation with the chief minister but it is a centre which takes a decision and it is an officer above the rank of a joint secretary. So the power in this case lies with the civil services. Right. So if you look at the power sector for instance you hardly hear of complaints about power cuts because it is all in the hands of the NDMC. In the NDMC. Yes whereas if you look at Delhi government then it is the private discomps whether it is BSCS or Tata power limited they run the distribution in Delhi. So which is why whether it is sanitation whether it is the schools if you look at the Naviuk schools again government schools government run schools but if you compare them with municipal schools or Delhi government run schools they have been doing much better because the control is with the bureaucracy I mean this is what what we have been told so far. So you know about Delhi the oldest the oldest stereotype about Delhi is that there are many Delhi's right that within Delhi there are many Delhi's is Shah Jharpur there is the outer Delhi there is the best and Delhi etc etc. Within all this the most privileged Delhi is the Latians Delhi right and that is where all the big shots are being Delhi and that is where Khan market is also located right. So and that also the one thing that is common there is they also breathe pretty much the same lousy air that the rest of us do. Yes. Yes that is something that I guess now it will be a major you know issue that the BJP will have to sort of you know come up with the policy decision and we have been told that they have already started working the Delhi government officer the secretary they have already come up with the roadmap for various schemes whether it is rupees 2500 for the women or whether it is tackling air pollution or cleaning of Yamuna we saw images of some action being taken in Yamuna so far which is saying. That is a little bit like it bandaid bandaid on a bullet bullet. A lot more doing but hopefully since there are no excuses left DK what is your prognosis going ahead. Well this entire system where you have this late little assembly of course the assembly was brought back because of pressure from politicians but if you go back and see what the state's reorganization commission told us and when they decided to do away with the assembly in 55. You have to have there the observation was that because you have the seat of the union government here you should not have a late little assembly. So now we are going to have a triple engine here but how it works we have to say we can only expect that things go smoothly but given the multiplicity of authorities you know there would some difference of opinion some administrative like champion's trophies going on right now and I have been watching since the afternoon since it is a bit like three fielders with good intentions go for a catch and the ball falls between them so those things can happen. Even when we talk about Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek Shailadek perfectly fine with the prime minister with the rolling party at the center even if you have different party even she had so many issues with the LG's. And Nelam what do you see going ahead because you have watched this very closely unlike DK and me. As far as I can see in how the BJP leader arrives who come to they are already at least in the first year they want to show some visible change as far as governance is concerned and whether it is about delivering on the rupees 2500 promise or ensuring you know this maula clinics are turned into their own new brand of a rogueam Andr. So they would want that some visible changes you know is there for the public to see especially as far as roads are concerned because infrastructure did take a hit during the Amani party second tenure. And if you are first test will be actually just a few months from now in the mom's own. Let's see what happens here. So in fact if you ask me really low-hanging food will be the most visible one that is with garbage mountains and the state of the Yamuna because quality of Delhi's air is an aspirational thing right to improve it because there are many factors including geographical and geological there. But the state of the river because it is so bad it can be improved and garbage mountains they can start going down. And Yamuna also I mean says given a timeframe of three years which is quite a short time for this kind of job. That is right. Let's see let's see where we go. The fact however is there is a change the same party rules of the center and now has Delhi after 27 years. The same party is sort of creeping on. These are operational couple going on MCD this is the cooperation of Delhi. And odds would be given their track record that's so rough that will also be run by the BJP. It's a possibility. I'm not saying it's an inevitability but it's a very strong possibility. That happens. Delhi Balas would really expect to see some results that are visible to Likadai. Thank you. Thank you. I know you've been filing since the morning coming this way and getting much else. Thank you very much particularly for finding the time."}