{"Episode Name": "Denzel Washington Has Finally Found His Purpose", "Podcast Name": "The Interviews - New York Times", "Episode Link": "https://www.nytimes.com/column/the-interview", "duration": "00:43:01", "text": " Hi, it's Samantha Shea from Wirecutter, the product recommendation service from the New York Times. We all know those people who are simply impossible to shop for. At Wirecutter, we have a huge collection of gift guides to help you find the perfect present. We test everything we recommend from an ice cream subscription to a back massager, to a trio of succulents. We believe there's a perfect gift for everyone, and Wirecutter can help you find it. Check out all our gift guides at nytimes.com slash gift guides. From the New York Times, this is the interview. I'm David Marquesi. So many of Denzel Washington's greatest performances have been defined by a riveting sense of authority, an absence of any pandering or need to be liked. There's something deep down inside his character that feels unassailable, a little enigmatic, and there's alone. The same steely qualities that have helped Washington become a legend, also, as I learned firsthand, make for an unusual and unusually complicated conversationalist. The first of our two discussions was done remotely. He was at a photo studio in Los Angeles, as the fires were still raging there, and I was home in New Jersey. This discussion felt as if it were being conducted entirely on his terms. Or let me put it like this. I didn't feel like we ever quite figured out how to connect. The second time we talked a little over a week later, things were different. I met him in person at a space in Manhattan where he was rehearsing for a rare Broadway appearance. He's playing a fellow in a new production that co-stars Jake Gyllenhaal as Iago and is directed by the Tony Award winner, Kenny Leon. I can't really say why with any certainty, but things just felt easier with him this time. What I do know, though, is that after it was all over, I was left with an experience just as memorable as one of his performances. Here's my conversation with Denzel Washington. Hello, I'm David. How are you, David? Denzel. Nice to meet you, pleasure. Just to start, I saw that right at the end of last year. You were baptized in earned your minister's license. I got baptized and I have to now take courses to obtain a license, but I did get baptized, but I'm not an unordained minister. Can you tell me about the decision to go through that process at this point in your life? I went for a ride one day and I decided to go up to Harlem. I was in Manhattan. I decided to get my car and drive up to Harlem and riding around, thinking of places where my mother lived and I stopped in front of the church that my mother grew up in and the door was cracked. So I went in and they were celebrating the young students, members of the church that were going to college and I got involved in an ad and one thing led to another and whatever it was weeks later, months later, I got baptized. Your father was a preacher, is that right? Yes. Yes. Do you feel like you're sort of following in a family tradition in some sense or connecting with him? It was prophesied in my use that I would travel the world and preach or speak to millions of people. I used to think that I was doing that through my work and now I'm trying to be a bit more specific about speaking, about my faith. I've seen you refer to the prophecy. Can you tell folks the story? Well, a woman was sitting in my mother's beauty shop in March 1975. The reason I was in there was because I'd flunked out of college. This is Mount Vernon, New York, right? Yeah, yeah, I was up in Mount Vernon and I was told to take a semester off from school to think about what I wanted to do. Every time I looked up in the mirror, I saw this woman looking at me and she said she was having a prophecy. She said I would travel the world and preach to millions of people. She didn't say anything about me being an actor or getting back in school, but I have traveled the world and I am speaking more and more. Was your gift for acting and the career that you've had? Do you feel like any sort of message was being delivered through that or was acting totally, you know, did it turn out that it was totally separate from the... I wouldn't say it's either or. I don't separate one or do I categorize, but it's definitely given me the platform to speak. Do you think there might come a time when you move to speaking mostly through a ministry and not through acting? I don't know. I don't know. And, you know, this is just a bit of a shot in the dark that it's based on some reading I was doing that I think, you know, sparked some connections for me, but I was just reading, there's a book by James Baldwin called The Devil Finds Work. And in there he makes connections between the church and theater. Does that comparison ring true for you? Do you see similarities between the church and theater? The universal stems from the specific, so you got to be more specific in what way? He says, you know, both are about people sort of experiencing an event together, communally creating the event as it happens when all these people are together in the moment experiencing the same thing. It sounds like James Baldwin is saying there is an energy and sort of a spirit that is created that for him was sort of similar between the church and the theater. And I can agree with that. I agree with that. Yeah. Yeah. The reason, of course, I ask about theaters because you're going back to the theater to do a fellow? Can you tell me about the rewards for you of doing Shakespeare? It's 48 years between, I played a fellow at 22 and I'm going back at 70. So the challenge of that, I love the theater, I started in the theater, I learned to act on stage. And as an actor, I think that still gives me the greatest joy is acting on stage as opposed to acting in movies. That's a thing that I've heard actors say a fair bit that there is an energy or a joy that comes from doing theatrical or media. Yeah. And I'm wondering if you can help someone like me who has no experience acting understand sort of the emotional difference of performing the different mediums. Yeah. Because it directors medium, no matter what you do as an actor, the director's slash editor decides whether it's in the movie or not. Theater is an actor's medium. Once the curtain goes up, it's between us and the audience. And they tell you how they feel that that night. You know, you've been acting for a pretty long time now. How is your relationship to acting changed? The lines are more frightening now. No, no, I mean, I like to think I know a lot more at 70 years old than I knew at 22. And enjoy the ride. I enjoyed, I appreciated more. That's for sure. What do you appreciate about it? Just being alive. That alone. You know, it's somebody said to consider in how I should even say it. Say it. It's considering how long you're dead. You're here a relatively short period of time. So for me, that means take full advantage of it and don't take moments for granted. I was wondering, you know, I also watched the commencement speech you gave at Penn. There's probably, I don't know, 10 years ago, something like that. And you talk to the students about the necessity of, you have to be willing to fail, which is another way of saying you have to be willing to take risks. And are there ways in which doing a fellow or even just doing theater feels like a risk for you? In light of all that's going on in our world. In light of all that's going on in our state, California, in our city specifically. It's just a play, you know, I'm grateful for the opportunity, but I'm putting perspective it's just a play. Yeah. Yeah. What has your experience been with the fires out there? Is it, they come near us? Yeah, you know, no, just as a spectator and just being amazed, first of all, it's just the scope and size and devastation. And then hearing all about a lot of people in our industry, you know, who've been affected, you know, Pacific palisades and just unbelievable and just, uh, it's unbelievable. I mean, it's going to change that city for decades. Yeah. It has changed the city already. How can the house go? Well, just will never be the same. You know, the scars, the stories, the testimonies that thousands of people have now, the loss of life and of property and memories. And it was, it is an equal opportunity destroyer from riches to poorest. It's a sad thing. Does it make you want to live somewhere else? What do you mean, live somewhere else? What do you mean like run? Well, it's just the reality of the danger in California is scary. No, doesn't make me want to live somewhere else. Let me shift gears for a second. Uh, I want to ask you about family. Did having children change your perspective on the work at all? Yeah, it changed my perspective. Like shoot, they got to go where does school? It cause how much? How much to close cause? Yeah, it changed everything. I think I'm always curious about with actors is an interest artist generally is when they realize it is also a business and a moneymaking enterprise. And you know, it's not just this pure thing. Refollow your artistic bliss all the time. And it's sort of what you're describing a little bit like you at some point, you thought, well, these I got to take money making jobs. Does that affect how you approach the work itself? When I learned about my favorite uncle, my least favorite uncle, my uncle, Sam, that was the I open. I'm like, what? He takes what? You mean from go, he gets how much? What did he do? You know, that's the reality of it. And a dollar is not a dollar. It's about 40 cents a time. Agent Shilloyer, business manager, Uncle Sam, everybody else gets business with you. The dollar is about 38 cents. And that's what it is. So you got to cobble those 38 cents is together to make a dollar, a real dollar. But does it affect the work? Like if you know that something is a money job, basically, do you go about doing that job? And if you ask me, did I have to take a job for money? No, no, I'm asking because I got about to answer it. Okay. Yeah. I've taken every job for money. There's no job I've taken where I went. You know what? You guys just keep the money. I'm just so happy. I'm just so glad to be an actor. I don't even want the money. My kids will work it out. They'll, we'll, we'll homeschool them. You're breaking my eye. I think you're, uh, there's got to be a difference in the calculus. When you say yes to Mississippi, basala or even, uh, Malcolm X, as opposed to virtuosity or, uh, ricochet action. Yeah, probably especially virtuosity. That was, that's in bills to pay. Ricochet was more like venturing down that road for the first time. That should be wrote. Yeah. Yeah. The action movie road, which I didn't really know virtuosity had definitely had something to do with tuition. I'm sure. Um, you know, going back to the subject of, um, your children, they, they all work in the business, right? Mm hmm. Was that something that you felt like you had to navigate with them or talk with them? I mean, I imagine they got jobs before they, before I knew they were in the business. John David was reading for ballers and I didn't even know about it. Cause he was working with his mom. All let it and tell me. So he got the job before I knew about it. Why didn't they tell you? Cause I probably would have told everybody or blowing it or done something because I talked too much. Uh, your wife, Paul, it is an actress. Yes. And singer and concert pianist, child prodigy, van cliber and you familiar with the van clibering competition. Yeah. The piano competition. Yeah. My wife was a van cliber and competitor. Juilliard, North Carolina school, the art soul. I married up. What have you learned about being an artist from her? That it's an art. You know, that it's an art. It acting just sort of chose me and I got going and all good. But she's an artist. I never looked at myself that way. And I just learned a lot about it. The discipline of it, the appreciation of it from her. So do you still not look at yourself as an artist? I try not to look at myself period. Yeah. Oh, look at myself. It's what I got time for that. Damn, not much for reflection. Can I ask you about the, the piece? I don't have any money. That was my next question. Yeah, I know. Go ahead. You would ask me well, what? The first person piece you did for Esquire last year. Sort of a tied to a gladiator too. You talked sort of a almost like a memoir, a piece you talked about your whole life and your career. And I think that was the first place, at least that I've seen, where you really talked about drinking. And in there, you said there's this long period. I think you pegged it as like 1999 to 2014. When you put the beverage down, you were bitter. Bitter about what? I was bitter when I put it down or I was bitter when I picked it up. I'd be interested to hear what you say now. Probably bitter when I picked it up. Not when I put it down. I wouldn't bitter when I put it down. Yeah. But what were you bitter about? Well, I think we'll pick something. I don't know. Yeah. Any excuse will do and no excuse is good enough. Do you feel like you have insight into sort of what the, like what the drinking was about? Who would have had that much time, brother? Yeah, we don't have that much time. Is it right that you used to carry around your acceptance letter from the American Conservatory Theatre? Now I kept a letter from my English teacher. Oh, why did why was it something that you kept? You just wanted to get all in my business because it made me feel good. It was, it was, it was a letter of recommendation. That's what it was. I'm just trying to fish around for things to that might be engaged. I don't mean to fish or, you know, I'm not trying to get out all up in your business or, uh, but you are all over my business, man. Yeah. I apologize. And I don't, I don't like him. And I'm just, I'm joking. I'm joking. Oh, thank God. That was a joke. You look so serious. I was a joke. Oh, he, I know how to get you now and you're easy. I'm too easy is the problem. Um, just think, can I be honest with you? Go ahead. Go ahead. I just want to mine as well. I don't know where to go conversationally with you. I feel like I'm just jumping around and it's not, I'm not connecting it. But, and I don't know what I'm supposed to what if there's a different you like, maybe I should ask you a question. Sure. Why do you feel that way? Oh, you know, um, can I give you two answers to that? Okay. I'll allow two answers. Yes. Well, the first answer is why I feel other ways, because, um, the answers have sort of been short and, you know, often people sort of are a little more expansive. And I think, well, I'll give you an expensive answer. Ask me a question that I'm going to give you an expensive answer. Well, uh, uh, good. All right. So you, you, not too long ago you finished filming a film with Spike Lee. Is that right? Yes. That was your answer. Tricked me again. No, I did. But it's what was Spike Lee good. So, uh, and I think it's your first time in low. Yes, your first time working with him since inside man, which is almost 20 years ago. How has your relationship with him changed over time? What was different about it? That's a good question. I'm finally, no, no, because I don't know that it, it didn't feel like 20 years. We had such great success. 20 years ago. I guess he kicked me to the curve and started working with my son. It actually was like, come to think of it. Maybe, yeah, he kicked me to the curve and started working with my son. No, it felt like we picked up where we left off. You know, it, I mean, Spike is spike. Meaning spike is consistent. Lee spike. I love that about him and I love working with him and I'd work with him again. And, uh, you know, I just like the way his brain works. Can I tell you the second reason why I'm having a hard time today? I like to ask philosophical question about like why people do what they do and sort of the meaning of it. And it seems like with that, I enjoy it. And, you know, it's, it seems like when I've asked you those types of questions, you know, you just, we just hadn't seemed interesting to you. And I think as a result, I feel like I've been flailing a little. Just trying to say, what about this? What about that? Well, here's your opportunity to get back on track with your next question. All right, I'll try again. I'll try again. It's not going to work. Yes, it looks. Okay, you get you. How are you going to say it's not going to work before you even try? Okay, I'll try. I'll try. Um, so, so it's not going to work. Dog, I hate going. You know, you're just liking making me squirm, but that's good. That's good. That's fine. That's fine. Go. It's the question. Um, so I'm always curious about the interplay, okay, between the life and the work. Okay. And I just, uh, rewatched, uh, flight, which, uh, that's my favorite performance of yours. Oh, wow. And now, yeah, in that one, you play an airline, uh, captain named whip, Whittaker, who, uh, struggling with alcohol, managed to save a flight and sort of semi-meractless fashion. And you know, the thing that I was thinking about in watching that one was how it fit in with your life at the time, because it was in that timeline. I think when you were drinking and I did wonder, did playing that character show you anything about your own situation or, or, yeah, I'll stop there. Uh, did it show me anything about my own situation? Not that I recall. I mean, first of all, I didn't drink and work. Never have. I'd work an endurance, like maybe when I'm finished the movie or whatever. So I wasn't. Honestly, I don't even remember whether I was drinking those evenings or not. I don't really recall to be honest with you. But what was the question you said? Did it affect? But you said, did it? Well, yeah, did, did sort of you, you learn anything about yourself from doing a role like that? Um, I don't, I think when you're in the middle of it, you're not so self reflective, because you're, you're still working out the character. You haven't shot the last scene. You don't know how it ends in a sense, you know, not making light of it, but not when you're in the middle of it so much. I think that's what any character. Um, you're saying you sort of gained some understanding maybe after the fact, not when you're doing it. Well, yeah, if you're thinking about it, which I probably wasn't. Yeah. Yeah. Um, more, what kinds of things do you think I should ask me? Ask, ask, I want to know more about you. Okay. I, I, we can switch roles. I would love to do that. What do you need to work on more than anything else? If you said to yourself, I, I wish I was better at this. What would that be? Aside from interviewing Denzel Washington? Come on. Don't, don't deflect. We're talking about you. I'll tell you, I'll tell you the thing that I need to work on more than anything else is I have an assertiveness, uh, and, and, uh, an assertiveness problem. And, uh, a problem with conflict. You mean, uh, being assertive or you're too assertive with being assertive? You're not assertive enough. I'm not assertive enough. And I have a problem with conflict in a way that because I try and avoid it, the problems end up rather than getting solved. They just linger. And that's something to do with your dad or what? Oh, this, see, I should be taking lessons from you. Would you answer these types of questions if I asked you them? Ask me. What do you need to work on the most? Hmm. Or fellow. No, I'm reflecting. Yeah, I know. I can't. That's right. So you don't deflect. Okay. No, good point. I don't know. What do I need to work on the most? It's even my answer sounds like a deflection. I was going to mention my faith, but that sounds like deflection. I don't know. Maybe that's a good thing. I can't think of something I need to really work on. Oh, I think that means I mean, nobody's perfect. Maybe you're not. I didn't say I was perfect. Not thinking hard enough. Yeah, maybe I'm not thinking hard enough. You know, relationships, you know, always do better there. How? Okay, I'm a talker. So I got to work on listening. Doesn't feel like you're a talker. Yeah, I'm guessing because I'm listening today. I'm, I'm, I'm to roll and playing. Wait, ask me another one. Tell me the second thing that you love, not the first thing. The second thing you love the most. Well, it's true things. Can I, can I tell us? Can I tell us? All right, two. All right, go ahead. This, uh, this is going to sound so corny. The second one's not as corny, but the, the first one that came to mind was, uh, laughing. Oh, laughing. Laughing. Great. That's a great thing. And then the, the second thing is, um, intellectual stimulation. I hate being bored. I like, I like both of those answers. I'm running with that laughter and intellectual stimulus. They stem, similar simulation. Stimulation. It would, it would say stimulus. Yeah. It was an intellectual stimulation. That's what obviously I do. Well, intellectual stimulation. Okay, your turn. The thing that what that I'm, the thing you love second most, I think, was the question. I think the opportunity to lift others up. How have you done that? Every opportunity in every, which way I can. Sometimes with a dime, sometimes with a dollar, sometimes with a good word. I love helping people. I love seeing people do well. So any opportunity I get to do that is really selfish because it makes me feel good. Can I do my version of the kinds of questions you've been asking me? Okay. How do you think evil works in the world? It's an opportunity for good to take advantage of it. Evil is short term. Evil always has an end. Evil is always revisited on the evil. Period. That's all I gotta say about it. It's always revisited on the evil. Where do you think evil comes from? We're the only animal on the planet that God is blessed with free will. You don't believe me running from a lion and see if the land goes. Ah, I think he's a nice guy. He does good interviews. We're gonna let him live today. Now he's gonna chase you down. He's gonna eat you. The last question for this time. What should I go away and think about? In preparation for when we talk again. Man goes down to the ocean and tries to fit all the knowledge of the ocean into his little brain instead of just jumping in the water and enjoying himself. Sometimes you just have to have faith in things bigger than our ability to understand them. Now you call it what you want. Some call it God. You call it what you want. But sometimes you just have to jump in a water and enjoy yourself and not try to figure it out. All right. I think that is something for me to think about. For next time for next time, bring your babies to suit. We're jumping in the water together next time. After the break, Denzel and I sit down in person and he digs a little deeper into this moment in his career. But today you didn't get a non-nation point. I ask you, are you working on a fellow or a Broadway? Are you kidding me? Oh, I'm so upset. I'm Jonathan Swan. I'm a White House reporter for The New York Times. I have a pretty un-centimental view of what we do. Our job as reporters is to dig out information that powerful people don't want published. To take you into rooms that you would not otherwise have access to to understand how some of the big decisions shaping our country are being made. And then painstakingly to go back and check with sources, check with public documents, make sure the information is correct. This is not something you can outsource to AI. There's no robot that can go and talk to someone who was in the situation room and find out what was really said. In order to get actually original information that's not public that requires human sources, we actually need journalists to do that. So as you may have gathered from this long riff, I'm asking you to consider subscribing to The New York Times. Independent journalism is important and without you, we simply can't do it. Thank you for giving me another run of this. I appreciate it. Thank you. And so we're in this rehearsal space where you're working on a fellow. How are the rehearsals going so far? Good, going well. We, in fact, we, we have our first day today, which is day four of rehearsal, where we'll start to just starting to stand it up on his feet, just starting today will be the first day of blocking. And how much of our conversation from last week, do you remember? Do you remember it? None. So that's helpful for me because I, I really felt like I was flailing, but, you know, at the end of our conversation, I had asked you if there was anything that maybe I could reflect on before we spoke again. And you told me this little, very short little parable about a man standing at the edge of the water. Man goes down to the ocean. I forgot where I got that. I might have been some yogi. I don't know where I got it from, but the way I interpret it over the years, the way I come to understand it is that jumping in the water is faith. Just jumping, you know, you can't figure it all out. Yeah. But the way I was thinking about that parable was that I felt like in our first conversation, I was to stuck in my own head, wrapped up in expectations of how the conversation was supposed to go rather than just being with you in the moment, you know, and sort of meeting you where you were. But my question also was, where did you learn that lesson that sometimes you just got to jump in the water rather than think about the water? Well, I've tried everything else. Yeah, I've tried everything else. You know, I was reading Matthew today and it talks about the mustard seed and if you put it in rocky soil, it won't grow, and all those things. And it talks about faith, you know, that you have to have faith that it will grow. And it talks about this, you can't even figure out how it grows, but why it goes or where the sun comes from man goes down. Man, here's what I mean. Yeah, man tries to reduce everything down to his understanding, which is the ultimate in ego, which is a final understanding that doesn't exist. So people don't understand God. So some say that for he doesn't exist where they say, I'm God because that's what they need. Well, I'm like, how's that working out? If that works for you. Okay. Yeah. I was watching something interesting last night. I'll jump it all over the place. Yeah, go for it. Yeah, give it a good exercise. I'm already going better. I was watching this thing about Herod. Man. Oh, King Herod. Oh, yeah. So this long special, I was like, hey, he was a mess. She, he thought he could think his way to heaven. So he kept building things on higher and higher places and he's going to be up here looking down on everybody and he obviously was a genius, but I guess he died in a worse way. I don't know. Yeah, I don't remember. You know, you also spoke last time about the value for you of helping people. Does acting help people? At this point, everything I'm doing is through the lens of what God thinks. Not what they think. I don't know what they think. That's a whole, he's going down now. You'll never come out of that. I hope they enjoy the show. I mean, you know, but I can't. I don't know what you need. I'm not, I can't. Yeah, I don't know. I don't do a poll before the screening or before the play starts and it's an interesting themes of jealousy and envy and pain and death and Kenny brilliant director. He's putting in what he calls the near future. So it's now, let's say, near now. So all of those things, jealousy and be all of that. It takes on a whole new thing with information age. What's your favorite line from a fellow? I don't know. I got two. You want to hear? First is a fellow. Are they from him or from a fellow? One's a young girl. A fellow is who can control his fate. And then my favorite line of all of Shakespeare is he also goes line. I am not what I am. I am not what I he said it yesterday. He's a complicated guy. He's going to be brilliant in this. Who Jake Gyllenhaal is playing a big game. Because he's bringing you. He's nuts. I love him. He's so he's complicated. But he's already got a handle on it. You know, I'm I'm I'm I can see how far ahead people are. Then me, I'm not worried about that because I don't like to learn the lines too soon. I was telling the young actor to like, well, why don't you like to learn them too soon? I says because then I'm the voice I'm listening to delivering the cues to myself. I want to hear it from you. And that's going to affect how I say what I say. Yeah. So for me, that works. And to be quite honest, because I played it before, I still kind of remember it, but it's not word for word. I'm seeing where I miss a word here. Word there. So it's like not like I got like I learned the first scene last night. And about an hour and a half, I ran a little bit with the kid this morning before I saw you know, I'm like, OK, I'll be all right. You just said Jake Gyllenha was complicated. Do you do you think in a good way in a good way? Yeah, the great way. Are you complicated? I'm sure. Yeah, I hope so. I mean, you know, trying to thin thin nerd, keep it simple. My mother used to say that. Keep it simple. That's hard to do. I'd like to tell you that this morning, I woke up and started thinking about God. I woke up and started thinking about a fellow. But then I said, but that's OK, you're excited. You know, it's an interesting place for me to visit now, 48 years after I visited it. The first time on the way to work, we were going down 9th Avenue. And we passed for the university. And I said, the first day of rehearsal, too, says, wow, 48 years ago, I was doing a dollar right there at 22. And now I'm heading over here to 40, for whatever it is, for this history to do a fellow again. And he's life interesting. And I'm only two blocks away from where we live now, which you know, and we go over, look, the park. Oh, my wife, I remember saying to my mother, I said, my, you know, all these years. And I'll remove two blocks. She said, yeah, but you went up 14 stories as only your mother. Yeah. You know, you said everything now is kind of about seeing it through the lens of what God thinks. Or at least through the lens of faith. Yeah. How does acting fit into that? That's that's why he play every day. I'm like, OK, Lord, I'm here. I think this would you want me to do now. I'm not sure why. You know, but one can say coincidence and serendipity and all those things. I bit my tongue almost half off about a few months ago. And it's affecting my speech. It forces me to slow down. You know, as they say, bite your tongue, or fellow says, rude, am I in my speech? I said, you know, bit my tongues, well, the fact of the matter is that is what it is. And I got to go forward with it. Yeah, I have to use it. I have a line. I don't even have just starting to learn where the will you that I go to answer this year, charge with the will you that with the will you that is hard is hard because my time is yeah, my tongue is sort and I got some temporary tooth put in because my tooth fell out of my head. So my everything is thicker. It's affected everything. And I'm thinking that's a bad thing. So I don't think it's ever going to heal. It's like I got a little flap in there now. But you just got to use it. You just got to use it. Jumping the water and enjoy yourself instead of worrying about drowning. Yeah. This is, you know, I've really been thinking a lot lately about David Lynch, who just died. Can I tell you, Elvis? Oh, what about that? I'm a movie man. That was a great move. Well, I loved it. Yeah, I was like this guy's nuts. But the thing that, uh, the one of the reasons I mean, I loved his movies, but one of the reasons that he was really meaningful to me and why I've been thinking about him so much is that, you know, probably about 15 or so years ago, maybe in a little long, I was really low, you know, sort of just really struggling. And I thought I got a change something. I might like can't go on like this. And I, because I liked his movies, I, you know, I saw that it was in a bookstore and I saw that David Lynch had this book, you know, called, catching the big fish. It was about creativity. And in there he has a bit where he's talking about why he meditates. He said, one of the benefits of meditation is that it helps you become more you. And then I started meditating about 15 or so years ago, maybe even longer. And it's completely changed my life, you know, like just seeing that one little sentence in that one book I picked up one day by David Lynch changed my life. Do you, have you ever had an experience like that? Or just some, you know, from afar, someone changed my life completely. Now I wasn't ready. Going back to Matthew, it must have been seed planted in, I forgot to, there's rocky soil. And there's the other one where it talks about the cares of the world coming and taking away from you. So she planted the seed, but I wasn't ready for it. Well, I didn't understand it. It's been a 50 year journey from then. So I was 20 then. I'm 70 now. It's been a, you know, I'm more than that 50 year journey to understanding. Did an artist ever change your life? An artist? Yes. So my English teacher, Bob Stone, who was in the fellow with Paul Robson, Robinson Stone, you can look him up. He wrote a recommendation letter for me for the Americans Conservatory Theatre, which I still have. And what he wrote was just so, he basically said to them, if you don't have the ability to give this young talent, what he needs, then don't accept him, which was like, wow, it's like reverse psycho, I was like, wow. But yeah, that he was artistically, especially early on, the most important person because he had been there. He understood the game. He helped me get introduced me the first agents and while I was still in college. You know, then isn't the funny twist of that story that didn't you drop out of ACT after a couple of months? No, I stayed for a year. For a year, okay. Politics. I could see what was going on and I already, what was going on? Ah, I don't need to bother with that, but this politics and, but more importantly, I had already signed with William Morris. I had already done a movie, TV movie, who I met my wife. I didn't need to stay. And it just, I don't say I outglued. I got enough and the agents would call them. And I'm like, I can go back there. Well, I don't need to stay because you would have to stay another two years to get a master's and I'm already signed with William Morris and getting work. So I left after a year. This is sort of a base question, but did you find that you cared at all about not getting an Oscar nomination for Gladiator too? Did it matter? Um, I was sitting there smiling, going, listen, look at you. But today you didn't get an Oscar nomination for an Oscar. You're working on a fellow on Broadway. Are you kidding me? Oh, oh, I'm so upset. You know, I'm happy for all that did. And I'm happy with what I'm doing. I, you know, I listened that I've been around too long. And I got, I don't want to say other fish to fry, but this is a reality at this age. You're going back to what I was saying at the beginning of wisdom is understanding. And I'm getting wiser, working on topping less and learning to understand more. And that's exciting. Is there anything you want people to take away from this interview? Believe in something greater than yourself. Believe. It's a complicated world. There's too much information coming out of from too many places, good and bad. For us to think that we can reduce it all to our level of understanding with our little brain. We are being forced to have faith. However, you interpret that. We are being forced by our circumstances. Look at the world. What does it give you every day? Fires, death, murder, politics, dictators, this, that division, separation. I'm right, you're wrong. Look at the world we've created for ourselves. So I'll answer. Mr. Washington, thank you for taking all the time to talk about this. This was a challenge and I appreciate you making it a challenge. It was good for me. Tell me again the name of the David Lynch book. Oh, yeah, catching the big fish. Catch in the big fish. You know, I'll eat me a copy. I'll send you a hard copy. I'm still analog. All right, I can't, can you read a book from a phone? You've never, never, right? All right, get to work. Yeah. All right, God bless you guys. Enjoy your day. That's Denzel Washington. A fellow begins previews later this month. This conversation was produced by Wyatt Orm. It was edited by Anna Bill Bacon, mixing by a FEMA Shapiro. Original music by Dan Powell, Alicia Beethoup, and Marian Lozano. Photography by Devon Yalkin. Our senior booker is Priyamath you and Seth Kelly is our senior producer. Our executive producer is Allison Benedict. Special thanks to Rory Walsh, Renan Burrelli, Jeffrey Miranda, Nick Pittman, Maddie Masiello, Jake Silverstein, Polish human, and Sam Dolnick. If you like what you're hearing, follow or subscribe to the interview wherever you get your podcasts. To read or listen to any of our conversations, you can always go to nytimes.com slash the interview. And you can email us anytime at theinterview at nytimes.com. Next week, Lula Talks with Senator Ruben Gajago. I'm David Marcazi and this is the interview from The New York Times."}