{"Episode Name": "Haviv Rettig Gur and Mustafa Barghouti Discuss the Implications of the Gaza Ceasefire Deal", "Podcast Name": "Fareed Zakaria", "Episode Link": "https://www.podtrac.com/pts/redirect.mp3/pdst.fm/e/chrt.fm/track/E31CC9/swap.fm/track/2nzGkisFXQswLYT5s325/traffic.megaphone.fm/WMHY4935285341.mp3?updated=1737327326", "text": " What does the future hold for business? Can someone invent a crystal ball? Until then, over 41,000 businesses have future-proofed their business with NetSuite by Oracle, the number one cloud ERP, bringing accounting, financial management, inventory and HR into one platform. With real-time insights and forecasting, you're able to peer into the future and seize new opportunities. Download the CFO's Guide to AI and Machine Learning for free at netsuite.com-GPS. That's netsuite.com-GPS. Upgrade your comfort to Emirates Premium Economy, the next time you fly from Dallas. Sync into soft leather seats with raised legrests and adjustable headrests. Elevate your dinner plans with delicious regional dining. All served with complimentary premium drinks. Enjoy endless entertainment with up to 6,500 channels, including live sports. There's no other premium economy like it. Fly Emirates. Fly Better. This is GPS, the global public square. Welcome to all of you in the United States and around the world. I'm Fariz Zakarya coming to you live from New York. We come to you today as Israel awaits the release of the first three hostages from Gaza. We will tell you what you need to know about them, the ceasefire and the Palestinian prisoner release. I will talk to a top Israeli journalist, Havi Vretik Gour and an important Palestinian politician Mustafa Bargutte. Also Trump 2.0 starts tomorrow. What can we expect on the economy and foreign policy? I'll talk to the Hoover Institute's Neil Ferguson. Six hours ago, just after 11am, local time, a ceasefire went into effect to visit between Israel and Hamas. We are now awaiting the release of three Israeli captives, all women from Gaza, as well as the release of some 90 Palestinian prisoners held by Israel. All this comes after a deal struck this week whose first phase will see 33 Israeli hostages release from Gaza and some 1000 Palestinian prisoners released by Israel over the course of six weeks. Under the deal, Israeli troops have begun to withdraw from parts of Gaza and much needed humanitarian aid has begun to pour in. The second and third phases, which are still to be negotiated, could see all remaining hostages returned from Gaza. Israel fully withdraw its troops and rebuilding begin in Gaza. Aviv Redegur is a senior analyst at the times of Israel. He joins me now. So Aviv, tell me, what does this mean in Israel? Because in Gaza, we understand. I mean, there's war, the massive destruction, 10, 10s of thousands of people that you can understand what it means for this to end even, even temporarily. What does it mean for Israel and what does it mean to see these 33 hostages released? Two things happened to Israeli's on October 7. The first was the real deep trauma of October 7 wasn't simply the massacre by Hamas. It is not surprises Israelis that the moment Hamas found they could, this is what they did. That's who Hamas have been for 30 years. But what happened was Israelis experienced being unable to help the other Israelis. Israel is a refugee nation. A nation whose most profound ethos is that they protect each other. It felt like that kind of crashing and falling apart of that fundamental ethos. And the second thing, just personally sitting hours on October 7 watching the WhatsApp groups of friends I know talking about how there are Hamas people outside their door is something that I'm never going to forget. And it's something that the Israeli people generally not going to forget. The second piece of it, I think, is that everything we learned about our enemies, that Hamas is willing to launch wars that are massively destructive to Gaza. That is not a deterrent to Hamas. Well we suddenly looked around and woke up to the fact that that is not a deterrent to Hezbollah or to all the different proxies of Iran. The Houthis, God knows they've caused horrific damage to Yemen. And so the world suddenly felt a lot more dangerous. So I think that for Israelis this moment is a moment of a temporary pause. We're going to get out our people, we're going to try and make up some of the betrayal of them that October 7 represents to us culturally. And we're going to then get back to the business of not allowing our enemies to threaten us on our borders again. You support this first phase of the deal. Explain why. It's very easy to support it. Israel does not give up anything strategic in any fundamental way. It will remain on the Gaza-Egypt border. It will remain capable of preventing massive Hamas-we-armament through the smuggling tunnels on that border, what we call the Philadelphia corridor. And when the Israeli army redeploys out of Gaza, it's redeploying 20 minutes drive away. This is not leaving Afghanistan, so to speak. And we're going to get our people out. Or as many of them as we possibly can. It'll last for as long as they can. And we haven't fundamentally given up anything strategic. We're going down. And the change in the second phase, the requirement for Israeli would roll in the second phase seems bigger. Massive. Probably including Philadelphia. The actual negotiation on the second phase begins 16 days into the first phase. Those are the terms of the agreement. So we don't entirely know who will be released. And we don't entirely know what we're talking about. You'd think that those negotiations will be successful. It would demand a much, much bigger political compromise on the part of the Israelis within Israeli domestic politics. In other words, the second phase would mean a Hamas retaking of Gaza. In a way that the third phase, Hamas is now going to try and walk us through this dance. They're going to show themselves driving in circles on a couple of Toyota, you know, pickup trucks around Gaza. They're going to have people dancing and screaming at the red cross vehicles as they bring out the three Israeli hostages were being released. They're going to, they're sending a message to the Israelis you didn't destroy us. And they're really more profoundly, probably sending a message to Palestinians. We're still in control. Don't you dare, right, come at us with complaints about the destruction of Gaza. So it's going to pretend to still be in good shape and able to take over. The second phase, it will actually be capable of taking over because it'll be capable of restoring its capabilities, rearming. Every anti-tank missile they launch now is unreplicable. If we redeploy from the Philadelphia corridor, those tank anti-tank missiles become replaceable. And so it's a whole different Hamas and a war that lasts forever. So for you, what is the most likely scenario is you have this first phase, but the Israeli, you don't actually get to the second phase. It's a much, much harder thing to push through Israeli politics, to get through the second phase. And it's in yeah, lost one far right coalition partner. And held on by the skin of his teeth to the second one for this phase. The second phase, if the war doesn't resume, that is the condition imposed by Bitzala Smutridge, the finance minister and his religious Zionism faction for staying in. In other words, if we go to a second phase, he leaves as well. And then it's quite likely an attorney who doesn't have a coalition. So for domestic Israeli politics, the Israeli political right will understand that that is a Hamas retaking of Gaza. It becomes much harder within Israel to go to that second phase. I should also say, we'll know that there's no second phase into the negotiations that are already during the first phase. So there's some strong possibility that the first phase isn't going to be seen through the end. We stay with me. We're going to take a break. Next on GPS, we'll get the Palestinian perspective on the ceasefire and hostage deal. And the politician will stuff about who to join us directly from the West Bank. What does the future hold for business? Can someone invent a crystal ball? Until then, over 41,000 businesses have future-proofed their business with net suite by Oracle, the number one cloud ERP, bringing accounting, financial management, inventory and HR into one platform. With real-time insights and forecasting, you're able to peer into the future and seize new opportunities. Download the CFOs Guide to AI and Machine Learning for free at netsuite.com slash GPS. That's netsuite.com slash GPS. Taxack knows filing your taxes can be complicated and that's why we have live experts to help you with any questions. They can hold your hand through the process beginning to end. But, unfortunately, of course, I mean, they can't actually hold your hand in person. I suppose you could hold your computer mouse while you chat with the expert about capital gains or whatever, which is sort of like holding hands. Sorry, point is, our tax experts can make filing easier. Taxack, let's get them over with. And we are back in CNN's chief national security analyst, Jim Shooter, joins me now from Tel Aviv. Jim, you have breaking news. That's right. Well, for it, after 470 days of suffering for Israeli hostages and, of course, for the people of Gaza, the first three Israeli hostages taken on October 7th have now been released, transferred from the hands of Hamas to the international Red Cross inside Gaza, and they will soon be on their way home. The three hostages released today, all of them women, Romi Konen, 24 years old. She was taken from the Nova Music Festival where so many people were killed in those morning hours of October 7th. Most of them, quite young people. Emily Damari, she's 28 years old. She's a British Israeli citizen. She was taken from the kabuts of Kafar Aza that morning, injured, in fact, during those attacks. And the third, the Rhone Steinbrecker, 31 years old, also taken from Kafar Aza. She's a veterinary nurse. To see those Red Cross vehicles driving through Gaza and now taking those three Israeli hostages home is quite a moment for read because it was on those same streets on October 7th when Hamas vehicles carried those hostages into Gaza. After, at gunpoint, many of them injured and sadly, we now know many of them killed on that day. I will say as well, there was quite a striking image at the exchange as it took place just a few moments ago because surrounding those Red Cross vehicles, as they received those Israeli hostages, were not just crowds of Palestinians from Gaza. And I think we're looking at pictures that are now from hostage square inside Tel Aviv and celebrations. Boy, what a moment there. It's been a long time coming. But there was another image from Gaza where we saw Hamas fighters in uniform surrounding those Red Cross vehicles as the exchange took place so that even after these 470 days of really unrelenting war, unrelenting Israeli bombardment, Hamas, while certainly devastated with enormous losses, you could see there it is still armed. Its fighters are still present in Gaza and I can imagine they and their leaders were eager to make this show of force even as they made this hostage exchange. This is, as you were saying earlier, for me, just the very first step in a long process over the course of the next six weeks. Some 33 hostages will be released and that just the first phase of a three-phase plan, but of course one with so many pitfalls we don't know if all of those phases will come through. But we should acknowledge this is quite a hopeful moment for those hostage families that have suffered so much. Thank you so much, and great reporting. We have heard the Israeli perspective. Let's get the Palestinian perspective on all this. Joining us from Ramallah is the politician Mustafa Barghudi, who is president of the Palestinian National Initiative. Welcome. Tell me what does it feel like for people in Gaza, you're in the West Bank, but this is in some ways the end of a kind of hell on earth that they have gone through, right? Absolutely. But let me start, Farid, by saying that we're absolutely, and I am absolutely shocked at how much the Israeli is. The most of the Israelis and many Western media outlets refuse to see Palestinians as equal human beings to Israelis. They talk about the 98 Israeli hostages or captives, if you want. But they don't speak in the same manner about 18,000 Palestinian hostages in Israeli jails, 18,000. They don't speak about the 56 Palestinian prisoners who were killed in Israeli jails during this these horrible months. And the solution to them is just to continue the war, objecting to the continuation of the ceasefire and ending the terrible war instead of looking for a solution for a political way to end Israeli occupation. They forget that the main problem here is Israeli occupation and Israeli oppression of the Palestinian people and the fact that we are subjected to a system of apartheid. And the Israelis are a fusion community. We are people who are refugees. 70% of Palestinians have been displaced by Israel. We never displaced Israelis. They displaced us, eliminating and deriving to the ground 521 Palestinian communities in 1948. So what I'm trying to say is as much as all prisoners must be released, dehumanizing Palestinians is unacceptable. And yes, Gaza is now getting out of a horrible situation. Gaza has been subjected to three terrible war crimes. This is not my opinion. This is the opinion also of the international criminal court. We've been subjected to terrible genocide that took the lives of at least and injured at least 170,000 people. We're talking about 10% of the population of Gaza who are now killed or injured, including 17,000 Palestinian children. If that had happened in a country like the United States of America, Farid, you would be talking about 33 million American people killed or injured in the course of 15 months. How could anybody accept that? We've been subjected to genocide. We've been subjected to collective punishment and we've been subjected to ethnic cleansing. Can I ask you the given the devastation? Do you think Palestinians in Gaza think it was worth it? In other words, what Hamas did and what it wrought, what the response is there, you see some of the Hamas fighters on the streets, there's a certain amount of celebration. But I have to assume that for a lot of people in Gaza, they feel this was not worth it. And particularly the brutality of the terror attack. And then the massive response it triggered was it worth it? Farid, nothing is worth the life of one child, whoever he is and whoever he is. Of course. But you say terrorist Palestinian attack, you don't say terrorist in the area attack. Is genocide an act of terrorism or not? I'm not justifying anything, but I'm trying to say, as I told you, on the 8th of October, if you remember, the 7th of October was not a cause, it was a result. It wasn't the beginning of the story, the story started 76 years ago in Israel, was established and it ethnically cleansed 70% of the Palestinian people. 70% of the people of Gaza are refugees who have not been allowed to go back home. The Palestinians have been subjected to, and it is nichlensing, occupation, the longest occupation in modern history, oppression. And then a system of apartheid, what is the way out of this so that no Israeli or Palestinian would be killed in the future? The way is to end Israeli occupation, allow Palestinians to have finally whatever other people deserve, which is freedom. Allow us to have democracy, allow us to have prosperity. Allow our, I mean, the people in Gaza before the 7th of October, 80% of the young people were unemployed. We can have a better future if the Israeli occupation ends. But the humanizing Palestinian is unacceptable. And not treating us as equal human beings is also not acceptable. I don't want anybody to die whether Israeli or Palestinian, but let me remind you, we could have saved 10,000 Palestinian people who were killed after July and we could have, Netanyahu could have saved the lives of many Israeli soldiers and more important, the lives of many Israeli prisoners, captains who were killed by Israeli bombardment. He refused to have the deal which we have now. We could have had it back in the third of July, we could have had it in May, but he insisted to continue with the war. And when I hear an Israeli expert say that they might not fully complete this agreement, that they might not complete this ceasefire agreement so that all hostages or captives or prisoners would be released in exchange of Palestinian prisoners, then what do they want? They want them all to be killed again, just because Netanyahu wants to keep his government. This man was so selfish and he was so criminal and even President Biden admitted that recently when he said that Netanyahu told him that he was, he was planning to smash Gaza completely down to us. But most of us are the kind of man who who who presents his own interest to any other thing. Let me ask you going forward though. It does seem as though for Israel the idea that Hamas would stay in power in Gaza is unacceptable. Now Hamas is a, is a, we at least a militant organization that espouses Islamic fundamentalism even theocracy. It does not abide by elections. If I can be honest with stuff, if you lived in Gaza, they would probably, Hamas would probably have arrested or killed you. They do not tolerate political dissent. So is it a reasonable request? Is it reasonable request going forward to say no Hamas control of Gaza? Look, we, Hamas says itself that it doesn't want to control Gaza. And by the way, no, Hamas will not kill me. Although I am a secular person, although I am a person who calls for nonviolence and actually I've managed to convince them largely to commit to nonviolence for five years before Israel continued its attacks. But never that is the most important question here. If you call them terrorist and fear and fundamentalist, what do you call smotterich and being fear? Apply, apply the same standard. Why don't you call smotterich and being fear terrorists? These people are fascists and a big, the smotterich did not shy away from calling himself a fascist from a fool. But I tell you what, what is the solution? Hamas said to us very clearly that they don't want to be the government, they don't want to be even in the government. But the solution is a national unity Palestinian government. The national consensus government that could be accepted by everybody could be operated with by everybody who is what we are calling for and would open the road for having free democratic elections for Palestinians. Something we didn't have for 20 years. We need elections. We need to have the right to choose our leaders like people to do in Israel or United States or Britain. And what we choose should be respected and accepted. We don't interfere in British elections and say we don't like this person or that. If the world accepts the principle of democracy, the principles of democracy for every country in the world, including Israel, and that's what justifies the continuation of this war, then they should accept our right to democratically and freely choose our leaders. I think we can build a better future, we can have a national consensus government which can bring back democratic systems to Palestine. And that is the solution. And Israel should stop objecting to our right of having democracy and free democratic elections. Mustafa, stay with us. We will try to get back to both you and Havi, but we do have new video of the hostages being handed over. So I want to go to CNN's Chief National Security Analyst, Jim Shudo, in Tel Aviv, who is back with me. Yeah. Well, for re-watching this video, what is key as we watch these three Israeli women gain their freedom after 470, what have been torturous days, is that as they leave that SUV there and will zoom in a little bit more as they step out, we can see that they step out of the vehicle under their own power. And they're able to walk out of the vehicle there, you could see it now, onto the Red Cross that received them. And that is a good sign. We did know that two of them were injured during the October 7th attacks, Romi Konen, one of them, and Emily Damari, that they were injured in their hand from gunshot, shrapnel, and their families had been told that their wounds worsened during their captivity. But they were able to walk out. That is one sign of their health there. But the other detail I draw your attention to as we watch this is that those are Hamas-Kasam brigade fighters around the vehicle, on top of the vehicle, providing security at this exchange. And it shows that however decimated they may have been by these 470 days of Israeli military operations there, some survive, they are still armed. They are still something of a force on the ground. They're not clear what their role will be going forward, but they certainly have not been eliminated as a fighting force. I should say that as this was happening earlier this morning, we and others witnessed Israeli forces withdrawing from some positions in Gaza as planned locations in both southern and northern Gaza, which was part of the sequencing of this hostage release and ceasefire deal. And I should also note, given Mustafa Barghudi's comments there, he's of course in the West Bank, that what is happening now or quite soon is that 95 Palestinian prisoners will be released as well. The Israeli military was waiting to confirm the release of the Israeli hostages before they began the process of releasing some 95 Palestinian prisoners, most of them women, a number of them teenagers. And I should note, given the administrative detention laws in Israel, that while many of those who are being released today were under administrative detention, that is they were not convicted of crimes, they were held under Israeli law. So you have a mix of prisoners who are being released in this very first stage. Again, I want to caution, as you well know for you, that this is a multi-step plan, three hostages today, another handful in a week's time, 33 over the course of six weeks, and Palestinian prisoners, hundreds of them being released as those Israeli hostages are released. But at each stage, of course, there's a possibility of interruption or upset. We'll continue to follow the events closely. But for those three families here in Israel, they're just about to be reunited, a moment they'd only imagined for 470 days. Thank you, Jim. And I would just point out to people who were watching those videos. You saw a lot of armed Palestinian militants. You noticed that they were fully masked. That is, of course, to evade Israeli security cameras and analysis of who they are. We will be back with much more on all of this right after the break. We have more breaking news. CNN's Jeremy Diamond joins me now from Rayim Israel. Jeremy? For Reid, we are here in Rayim near a military base where we expect that those three female hostages, we've just been alerted, have now been transferred into the arms of the international Red Cross inside of Gaza. This is the point where they will then be transferred in vehicles. And behind me here, it may be hard to see at the moment, but there are two choppers, two military helicopters, that we saw landing here within the last hour or so, that will then transfer them to a hospital in Central Israel. We've also been told, as of now, that Israel has been informed that according to the Red Red Cross, the three hostages are in good condition. They are expected to meet their mothers right here at the Rayim base. We've told that the mothers of all three of these women, Romi Gonean, Doron Steinbracher and Emily Damari, all three mothers will indeed be here at Rayim to meet their daughters for the first time after more than 15 months of captivity. And there is also quite a bit of symbolism at this very moment for Reid, and that is because one of those hostages in particular, Romi Gonean, she was kidnapped by Hamas at the Nova Music Festival, which happened just behind the highway here that you can see behind me. And so, from the same place where she was taken captive, she is also expected to experience her first moments of freedom to finally be able to hug her mother after 15 months of captivity. Really an extraordinary moment, as we have also been watching, of course, for Reid, extraordinary moments playing out inside the Gaza Strip as well, as people are finally experiencing their first respite after 15 months of war, seeing hundreds of atrox beginning to cross into the Gaza Strip, people celebrating this moment where they no longer have to fear, at least for the time being, the threat of bombs and missiles that have been dropping on them, of course, over the course of the last 15 months. And so, this really is one of those rare good news moments that I'm being able to report here for Reid after covering this war for the last 15 months. Great. Great reporting. Thank you, Jeremy. We are back with Havi Vredegur, senior analyst at the times of Israel. Vev, you know, in response to that attack by Hamas, and as you pointed out, that sense that Israel was caught napping, that the security agencies were caught napping, that people were not able to help their fellow citizens, the government basically announced that their goal was going to be the total victory, the destruction of Hamas. At this point, even Israel's foreign ministers admitted it's plain to see Hamas has not been destroyed. I was wondering, you know, what do you make of the kind of criticism of Israeli strategy that people like David Petraeus, may general Petraeus or not a, you know, not an opponent out of Israel at all, strong supporter who said, look, if you're just going to try and destroy Hamas, destroy Hamas, you're going to create more terrorists than you kill, you're going to create more Hamas fighters than you kill, you have to have a strategy that is very different that tries to win the hearts and minds of people in Gaza, that if all you're doing is this, you know, is just brutal devastation, it's going to be counterproductive. You're going to have to keep going back to places that you thought you had cleared. And that does seem like it is exactly what's happened. Israel's gone back to Khan Unis three, four times. It's gone back in northern Gaza that it cleared. What is, you know, what is the trajectory? Is it now that Israel goes back as you say after the ceasefire and just keeps trying again, you know, more and more devastation, more and more people killed? It's a great question without a quick answer. There is an Israeli lesson learned from the American experiences in Iraq and Afghanistan, which is not to clear and hold, not to stay because that creates more targets on your side. And so with the Israelis adopted in Gaza was a strategy of long degradation. So you take a place, you kill as many Hamas fighters as you can, you pull out, they come out of the tunnels, you then take it again. It's new targets on their side rather than on yours. So we have seen that be the sort of fundamental strategy and that looks exactly like what, you know, concerns David Petraeus, but it is in fact a lesson from the American failure. And Afghanistan, Marines cleared and held a valley after valley and that did not destroy the Taliban and be actually made it much harder for the Americans to actually face the Taliban where they were. So that's the sort of tactic of that. That's what I think they are at a tactical level. What I think it's persuasive saying strategically, what is Hamas? It's the idea of armed resistance. And if you do that, you're just going to create more Hamas fighters. They may not call themselves Hamas. They may be just militants, but they're going to, you know, if you kill 47,000 people, and I understand a lot of them are Hamas fighters, my point is just the American experience at least was you generate a lot of radicalism in that population. So I want to say something fundamental that I think Israelis know and that unifies Israelis on right and left and that maybe the rest of the world doesn't quite see for 17 years Hamas ruled Gaza and it built almost nothing in Gaza in those 17 years except for one enormous thing that is by far the largest thing Palestinians have ever built. And that's a tunnel system of 500 kilometers of tunnels. Some of them wide enough to drive trucks through. And the tactical purpose of it, the only purpose of those tunnels was so that when the enemy comes for them, the only way to come for them is to cut through cities, to get to them. I'm going to risk getting people upset. What that means is that on October 7, Hamas did not carry out one atrocity. It carried out two. One was against the Israelis and the second one, which in sheer human suffering is an order of magnitude higher, was against Gaza. Fereid, not a single Gaza in civilian has been allowed to step foot in a single tunnel in 16 months. The tunnel's purpose is to allow Hamas to pop out now and doesn't matter what happened to Gaza. It doesn't matter how much the Israelis turned over Gaza to try and get into those tunnels. They can survive. Now when you face an enemy for whom the destruction of their side is the strategy, this is by the way the Houthis in Yemen and Hezbollah in Lebanon, there is not a single one of the rockets that Hezbollah ever deployed in Lebanon out in a field or on a mountaintop, every single one is in a village. And so when you face that enemy, what does victory look like? I want to say something really blunt that Israelis, I think, allow them to move forward with the steel and make them not impressed by Hamas' celebrations. Gaza before the war, before October 7, had a GDP per capita of Morocco and Egypt. It was not an open-air prison that is depicted in essentially a Western discourse that is almost entirely the propaganda of the different sides competing for everybody's imagination. People can look that out, these are world bank numbers. Gaza was destroyed by a fundamental strategy of Hamas. Now you don't get away from it by deciding the Israelis are evil. If the Israelis are good, good people stuck in a bad situation, then Hamas' strategy is monstrous. If the Israelis are evil, Hamas' strategy is doubly monstrous. This stuff of our gouti is not Hamas. He's also part of political factions that are utterly hated, despised, and deeply unpopular in the Palestinian population. If we go to the elections he's called for, which I am not opposed to, it'll be clarifying, Hamas would win a sweeping victory, and will be the destruction of Gaza. You cannot rebuild Gaza if Hamas takes over. Say with us, we have to go for a break next on GPS. We are expecting President Biden to speak on the events in the Middle East, and we'll be following all the new developments on the hostage release when we come back in a moment. This week on The Assignment, with me, Adi Cornish. Bullshow Gen Z is drinking a lot less. People of all generations are talking about reducing or stopping drinking. I mean, if you've been on social media for half a second in the past few weeks, you've run into some mention of dry January. What's pushing so many people to reassess their entire relationship without call. And now that's sobriety isn't just for people who go to meetings, what are we all doing to fill the gap? Listen to The Assignment with me, Adi Cornish, streaming now on your favorite podcast app. The Israeli hostages are now in the custody of the IDF. Let's get more of the Palestinian perspective on all of this. Giving us from Ramallah is the politician Mustafa Bulkudi, president of the Palestinian National Initiative. Mustafa, I want to ask you where you see things going forward here, because as Havi was describing, it is for better or worse going to be very hard for an Israeli government to accept the idea of a total Israeli withdrawal from Gaza. It could result in Bibi Netanyahu's government collapsing. Is there a scenario in which Arab troops could come in and maintain peace to a degree to which both sides would find that comfortable? I ask you this because the Arabs have played an unusual role in recent years, which is they have spoken about Palestinian rights in Palestinian liberty and the Palestinian state, but done very little about it. And in fact, many of the Gulf states have been trying to cut deals with Israel, normalized relations under the Abraham Accords Saudi Arabia, apparently wants to do this. So is there a possible that you could get a coalition of Arab countries, would the Palestinians accept that kind of a presence as one way of allowing the implementation of phases 2 and 3? A short answer is no, but before I respond to details, let me respond to you Israeli guest. He claimed that if we have elections, Hamas would have a sweeping victory. That's not true. All the puns that are done since we are following an now fully proportional system, so that nothing in Palestine would get an absolute majority. That's impossible. And then about Gaza, the West Bank collectively or just of course, of course, West Bank are there collectively? Absolutely. And by the way, I would rank very high if such elections happen in case there is a presidential elections. I mean, but let's not go into that. The big question here is why do we need others to govern our life? Would Americans accept that Mexican troops would come and ruin them? Why do we need Arab troops here? What we need is free democratic elections where Palestinians can elect their leaders, and that would be able to run themselves. But the big question here is not about Israeli withdrawal only from Gaza, but also from West Bank. Why should Israel maintain its troops in the occupied West Bank, which according to international laws, should be released, should be free from the Israeli occupation? Should be the place of the future Palestinian state. The truth and reality is that we have now 7.3 million Palestinian on the land of historic Palestine versus 7.1 million Israelis. What's the solution to that? Two states solution is red doesn't want that. It refuses it. One democratic state, they also don't want it. So what's the solution? If Nick Linding of Palestinians, is that acceptable according to international law? Assisting of long life apartheid that we have to be subjected to these are not solutions. The only solution is to end occupation allow Palestinians to be free finally. And they cannot keep calling us, go to Palestinian terrorists. Your guests were speaking about the couldn't destroy Hamas. Of course, because they were not only bombarded Hamas, they were bombarded civilian population. Within 10,000 children are not Hamas fighters. And this is where they didn't care about the lives of these Palestinians. They didn't care about the international law or about the international humanitarian law. 30 years ago, there was no Hamas troops. It did not exist. And Israel concluded that we said the agreement was Palestinians. And then Netanyahu personally, under my debt, and he waited the Israeli public till its half-rable, the prime minister of Israel, who signed the agreement was assassinated. That's the truth. That's the reality. They called them terrorists. Well, George Washington was accused of being terrorists by the British colonialism. The same applies to Ninsun Mandela, who was on terrorist America and less in the American Congress for a very long time till he became the elected president of South Africa. Please, we want the world to see us as equal human being. As people who deserve freedom, we don't need other people to rule us. We want to rule our lives. And if there is end of occupation, we will have peace. Nobody will be threatened. Israel will have security. We will have security. Israel is will have security. Israel cannot have security alone and not without Palestinians having security. That's the basic rule. And that's what they should understand. Without our freedom, without indigo occupation, without ending the system of oppression and apartheid, we will not survive. And that's the only way out of this, not to continue to think how to reactivate the military operation, which would host so many lives enough with enough. 87,000 tons of explosives were thrown on Gaza. That is 36 kilograms of explosives for each man, woman and child in Gaza. They speak about tongues. Well, does Israeli government was meeting inside the tunnel, rather than they have very good shelters. We don't have them. The best way out of this is to stop the war, not to continue. Let me just ask Khaviv to quickly if you can, because we don't have a lot of time. But, you know, address this larger issue of what is Israel's strategy. There are 7 million people in Israel who don't have political rights and they don't have their own country, the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. What is what happens to them? Palestinians in the West Bank live under military rule. None of this ends until that ends. They don't elect the Israeli military governor of the West Bank. That is a fundamental truth. I remember being a bright-eyed left-wing idealistic teenager. And watching in 1996 when the Oslo peace process was on the line and Hamas detonated in the week before an election, two massive suicide bombings in Jerusalem. The mastermind of those two suicide bombings is being released now, today. And tilted that election away from the left and to the right that was skeptical about the peace process by the narrowest margin in the history of an Israeli election. That was Benjamin Netanyahu's first election win and he won by, I think, 30,000 votes. The second Antifada in 2000 was a wave of 140 suicide bombings, a great many of them orchestrated by Hamas, not all of them, but certainly probably the preponderance. And it was at the height of the peace process when Barack and Arafat were at Camp David with Bill Clinton negotiating things like shared sovereignty on the Temple Mount. Hamas is not fighting for Palestinian freedom. Hamas is fighting to destroy any possibility of peace ever. And it is willing to destroy Palestine on the altar of destroying the Jews because it is fulfilling a vast redemptionist, Islamist political project that has nothing to do with freedom for Palestinians. We have already seen in the last two days Hamas put out on its telegram groups notices to Palestinians who have publicly criticized them while they've been in the tunnels in Gaza that they're coming for them and they're going to kill them. And so no, I submit to you that the question of Palestinian freedom is fundamental and we have to talk about it and we can talk about it the second Hamas is out of the picture. That's where things stand. All right. President Biden just landed in Charleston, South Carolina. This is his last full day in office. We're waiting for a statement from him. I think he's on 70 days. Former women will be released in seven days. Three additional hostages every seven days thereafter, including the least two American citizens in this first phase. We pray for them and their families for their going to be a long recovery. By the 60th day of the deal talks will begin in the second phase. This phase includes the release of Israeli soldiers and a permanent end of the war without a mark, without a mosque in power or able to threaten Israel. Hundreds of trucks are entering Gaza as I speak. Their carrying assistance for civilians who suffered enormously from the war that Hamas started in October 7th, 2023, nearly 15 months ago. The day alone, we anticipate several hundred trucks will enter in the Gaza Strip as I'm probably as I'm speaking. After so much pain, destruction, loss of life, today the guns and Gaza have gone silent. This was the deal that I outlined for the world back in May 31st, many of you have covered it at the time. I was endorsed overwhelmingly by folks around the world, including the UN Security Council, unanimously endorsed the deal, and developed a coordination with the Egypt Cutter and Israel. I've worked in foreign policy for decades, and this is one of the toughest negotiations I've been part of. Many of you have followed these negotiations with the test that the road to this deal has been not easy at all in a long road, but we've reached this point today because of the pressure Israel built on a mosque backed by the United States. I've said my policy of affirms support for Israel has been, letlessly pursuing diplomacy. I've risked drawing America into a wider war in the region. I listened to those voices, many of whom I respected a great deal, but I concluded, abandoning the course I was on would not have led us to the ceasefire we're seeing today. But instead, it would have risked the wider war in the region that so many feared. Now the region has been fundamentally transformed. Hamas's long-time leaders, Simmars, did. Hamas sponsors in the Middle East have been badly weakened by Israel, backed by the United States. Hezbollah, one of Hamas's biggest backers, was significantly weakened in the battlefield, and its leadership was destroyed. Even as we worked for diplomatic solutions in Lebanon, we provided ongoing assistance to support Israel's military campaign against Hezbollah, including its efforts to take out the terror infrastructure along the border of Israel and Lebanon. Israel's campaign was extremely successful, so much so that by the end of November the United States had brokered a ceasefire in Lebanon. Hezbollah did what it said it would never do. It cut its deal and abandoned Hamas. And today Lebanon, in Lebanon, there's finally a new President of Prime Minister, both of whom support a sovereign Lebanon without Hezbollah running the shore or playing any part in it. The Assad regime next door in Syria is gone. The moving Iran's already access to Lebanon. Iran is in the weakest position in decades after the U.S. military helped defend Israel from Iranian missiles and support it is with military response inside Iran. Just look across the region. In Lebanon, there's an opportunity for a future free from the grip of Hezbollah in Syria, a future free from the Assad, a tyranny of Assad. For the Palestinian people, a credible path to a state of their own. And for the region and the future normalization and integration of Israel with all its abnevers, including Saudi Arabia, if they're spoken with. You know, we've had many difficult days since Hamas began this terrible war. We've encountered roadblocks and setbacks where we haven't given up. And I special thanks to my team, particularly Brett McGurk, who many of you know, spent weeks and months working nonstop to reach this deal, many of those weeks and months out of the country. Today's ceasefire in Gaza and the release of hostages is a result of a principled and effective policy that we've provided over for months. And we got here without a wider war in the Middle East than many predicted. And now it falls in the next administration to help implement this deal. I was pleased to have our team speak as one voice in the final days. It was both necessary and effective and unprecedented, but success is going to require persistence and continuing support for our friends in the region and the belief in diplomacy backed by deterrence. So as we reflect on the news from Gaza today, we also remember all the victims of this war. They were mindful and mindful that's a pursuit of a lasting peace while never easy to quick must always be our calling. So thank you all for listening. My god bless you all. My god protector of troops. I'm looking forward to this deal being fully implemented. And I'm sorry. I'm not going to take any questions now because I'm waiting. There's a whole congregation waiting for me. And I'm sure the remainder of the day I have an opportunity to speak with you. Thank you very much. Anything about the condition of the hostages that were released today and the others? Yes. I've just got a call saying the three are released in the Gaza to the out of the hands of the of their captors. And they appear to be in good health, but it's early to tell that literally being they may be across the border of the Gaza Strip into Israel now. I'm not certain. Thank you. Sir, any concerns about the must be moving? No. Will you remain involved in the in the deal as it was forward? No way out. I'm proud of the deal. Thank you, sir. Thank you. Thanks to all of you for being part of the show. Next up, inside politics. The hands is constantly evolving with new discoveries happening every week. Cracking your genetic code, microbes surviving in space, just a glimpse of the breakthroughs happening right now. I'm Dr. Samantha Yamin and I'm the new host of Curiosity Weekly from Discovery. Each episode we dive into cutting edge topics. With expert guests, we make sense of the biggest questions shaping our world. Listen and subscribe to Curiosity Weekly wherever you get your podcasts."}