{"Episode Name": "How Canada is Responding to Trump\u2019s New Tariffs", "Podcast Name": "Fareed Zakaria", "Episode Link": "https://www.podtrac.com/pts/redirect.mp3/pdst.fm/e/chrt.fm/track/E31CC9/swap.fm/track/2nzGkisFXQswLYT5s325/traffic.megaphone.fm/WMHY9673739277.mp3?updated=1738532925", "duration": "2593", "text": " This episode is brought to you by Shopify. Forget the frustration of picking commerce platforms when you switch your business to Shopify. The global commerce platform that's supercharged as you're selling, wherever you sell. With Shopify, you'll harness the same intuitive features, trusted apps, and powerful analytics used by the world's leading brands. Sign up today for your $1 per month trial period at Shopify.com slash tech. I'll lowercase. That's Shopify.com slash tech. This is GPS, the global public square. Welcome to all of you in the United States and around the world. I'm Fariz Akaria coming to you live from New York. Today on the program, President Trump announced 25% tariffs on Canada and Mexico and 10% on China. I'll go in Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau, retaliated, with 25% tariffs on many American goods. I'll talk to Christian Freeland, Canada's former finance minister, who is a front-front owner to replace Trudeau as PM. Then, what does it mean to be a Jew today after October 7th, after the war in Gaza? Peter Bynard offers his perspective in a new book and here on GPS. Also, artificial intelligence was atop the headlines again this week as a Chinese company announced a stunning development. I'll talk to LinkedIn co-founder Reed Hoffman about the news and about how AI can actually improve all our lives. But first, here's my take. Is this a Sputnik moment? The world has reacted with astonishment to the release of a Chinese AI model from DeepSeek, which appears to be able to perform as well in some cases better than Chad GPT and other cutting-edge models put out by US companies. Americans had assumed that their massive lead in funding access to high-quality chips and innovation would keep them well ahead. That assumption now looks like hubris. The episode does raise big questions, in some ways much bigger than the ones raised by Sputnik. Sputnik, after all, was about the Soviet government space program versus that of the US government. The few thought that the Soviet economy was in general more technologically advanced than America's. But DeepSeek is a private Chinese company that demonstrated its stunning prowess on the cheap in the most important technology for the future. There are also sorts of questions about just how much DeepSeek's model actually cost, whether it needed to use US models for training and whether there was any closet Chinese government help. Given the enormous efforts that the United States has made over the last few years, chip bands, export controls, etc., DeepSeek has made a remarkable achievement. It suggests to me two lessons and two questions. The first lesson is that over time, open systems are likely to outperform closed systems in AI. And open system is like Lego blocks with the instructions. A closed one is a built Lego structure with the instructions kept secret. Many have pointed out the DeepSeek used Metas open source Lama model to train. It also used Quan, a family of AI models, also open source put out by the Chinese technology giant Alibaba. The DeepSeek is currently the best. China's big technology companies have been releasing a number of artificial intelligence models, mostly open source, that are getting better and better. If the history of technology is any guide, the ability to see the innards of these models and understand their reasoning should lead to greater and faster tech innovation than using closed models that others can't use for collaboration. Second, constraints can be useful as Intel's former CEO, Pat Gelsinger has noted. Just as art sometimes flourishes in repressive environments, will restrictions force artists to be creative, so also engineers often operate best under constraints. Forced to use second tier chips, Chinese engineers produce creative workarounds. That's not just true with DeepSeek. In 2023, the Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei released a phone with a 7nm chip, a kind that had been explicitly banned by US export controls. There is some evidence that after years of sclerosis, China's chip makers have responded to American bans by becoming more innovative. In a fascinating recent interview, Liang Wenfen, the CEO of DeepSeek, also argues that his engineers are more motivated by doing research than making money and seems to contrast that attitude with the one prevalent in Silicon Valley, which is all about maximizing revenue, providing cloud services, generating cash flow. Demis Hasabis, who leads Google's DeepMind and won the Nobel Prize for its scientific breakthroughs, is said to have fought to keep his team in London far from Silicon Valley so that they can focus on basic research. The first question that DeepSeek raises is, can the US stop China from advancing along the technology frontier? Some argue that DeepSeek shows that export controls work. The model used many in video chips that were one-scutting edge, but soon China will not have access to the best chips and will suffer more from the ban. But as we've learned with rounds and rounds of global sanctions on Russia, the world economy is very large and porous. Stuff gets through. And China is not Russia. It is a vast technologically sophisticated economy with millions of software developers and hundreds of high-quality firms in the technology space. Human talent on that scale will find ways to innovate, even if the measures keep China slightly behind. The second question, what is the cost of this approach? If technology bans and export controls add best to keep China behind a year, maybe just several months, is that gain worth the cost? The cost is Chinese retaliation, limiting America's access to key materials that it needs for high technology. More important, a decoupled global economy also creates a closed ecosystem in which American technology companies will not face competition from the best. Is Tesla going to innovate at the highest levels if it is not facing its strongest Chinese rival? And finally, a technology decoupling means that AI will become the central part of a new global arms race, totally unregulated and unconstrained. As the world's two largest economies hurtled towards superintelligence, no-holes barred, and incorporate it into all military applications, including nuclear weapons. If artificial intelligence is as revolutionary a technology as we think it might end up being, having it unleashed in every realm of human life with absolutely no guardrails points to a scary future. One far more dangerous than anything people imagined, because of the Sputnik satellite. Go to CNN.com slash for read for a link to my Washington Post column this week. And let's get started. Yesterday, President Trump ordered tough new tariffs on America's top three trading partners, China, Mexico, and Canada. The northern neighbor was hit with a 25% tariff on all exports to the U.S., except for a lower 10% rate on energy and oil. Our latest Canada's Prime Minister Justin Trudeau responded with a 25% levy on many American goods, Salomon saying, quote, we didn't ask for this, unquote. Joining me now is Christopher Freeland. She served as Canada's Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister under Trudeau until she resigned in December. Her move helped bring down Trudeau's premiership. She's now one of the front runners to replace him in upcoming party elections. Christopher Freeland, pleasure to have you on. So Donald Trump says, thank you. Donald Trump says that the reason he's doing this, this is the ask and this is the justification, is the fentanyl trade, the fentanyl that is coming in from Canada and Mexico. The bizarre part about this is not a lot of fentanyl that comes into the United States from Canada. I mean, I think the latest numbers we have, it's 43,43 pounds coming out of Canada and 21,000 pounds coming out of Mexico. So what you've negotiated with Donald Trump before, over the last NAFTA renewal renegotiation, why is he doing this to Canada? What is the motivation? It can't really be fentanyl. You're absolutely right for the pretext or utterly ludicrous. This action is utter madness. It is a betrayal of America's closest friend of your ally, your neighbor, your best partner in the whole world. It is an act of economic warfare and the president was clear just this morning that it is a direct attack on our sovereignty. And I have to tell you, for me, Americans are going to be astonished by the Canadian response. We're hurt for sure, because we're your friends and neighbors, but most of all, we're angry and we are united and resolute. Our Canada is the true North, strong and free. We love our country and we are united. We are strong, we're smart. We're going to fight for our country. We're going to fight for Canada and we're going to be successful. So let's put a little bit of substance on that. You're a much smaller economy than the United States. 75% of your exports come to the United States, whereas I think the other way around is like 12%. There's only so much you can do to retaliate with an economy that much larger than yours. So how do you do it in a way that's effective? Well, first of all, we have more leverage than American stink. Canada is the largest market for the United States, larger than China, Japan, the UK and France combined. And we know Americans. We know that for you guys, the customer is always right. Were your biggest customer doesn't make a lot of sense to be punching us in the face. The second thing for readers, you know very well, is America's tariffs are self-harming. By putting tariffs on the stuff that Canada sells you, you are going to hurt Americans. You have put a tariff, you're putting a tariff on the oil and gas that we sell you. That is going to make prices at the pump, prices at grocery stores a lot higher. And the final thing for read is this matters to us so much more than it matters to you. Our very sovereignty is at stake. You are seeing a phenomenal United and Resolute response across Canada. And for Americans, does this really matter to you at all? I mean do Americans wake up in the morning and say, wow, we got to beat up on those Canadians. I don't think so. I think Americans actually recognize that we are a great partner, a great neighbor, a great friend, that this is ridiculous. It is not worth Americans suffering over this. As the Prime Minister said, we do not want this conflict, but we're not going to give in. Today with us, when we come back, I'm going to ask Christopher Island, does this mean that countries like Canada, Mexico, will find new markets and new alliances in places like China when we come back. I'm Anderson Cooper. Grief isn't talked about much, but that's what my podcast is all about. This is all there is, season three. In the past year, I've listened to about 6,000 voicemail messages you've left for me after season two and most of the one sent in so far this season. When I listen to your messages, it makes me feel less different and alone. My grief is deep and real and it has brought me for my knees. Listen to all there is with Anderson Cooper wherever you get your podcasts. And we are back with Christopher Island, a former top official in Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau's government and now a front runner to take his job. Christopher Island, when you look at this situation where the United States is basically living tariffs on its closest allies, particularly Canada, really its oldest ally, does it make you think Canada is going to have to make its way in the world and find new markets and new friends? Of course China, the second largest economy comes up and when one thinks about this? Fred, we have so many friends and even family members in the United States. Our preference and our hope is that you guys are going to come to your senses. Our preference and our hope is that we can go back to a win-win North American partnership. I mean currently our trade should be governed by the USMCA, which we negotiated with President Trump. When we signed that deal, he said it was the best trade deal ever. So what we really want is for all the Americans who are listening to say, what the heck is going on? You mean we're fighting with the Canadians and to get back to a reasonable, mutually beneficial relationship. That is our preference. When you have thought about this thing, you've talked about 100% tariffs on some things. You've talked about a boycott of American goods, which would be not a formal legal thing, but you're just urging Canadians to stop buying American goods when they go to grocery stores. Is it also, are you also thinking in your proposals of doing something on oil? We import a lot of oil from Canada. To read, I'm glad you mentioned the boycott because that is already happening across the country. Americans have to understand how hurt and frankly how furious Canadians are. Our sovereignty is being challenged and so yeah, regular Canadians across the country are coming up with ways to stand for Canada, to fight for Canada, to defend Canada, but mostly to say to our American neighbors, guys, just cut it out. Just stop it. This is a terrible idea and yes, we are going to use all the tools in our toolbox. You mentioned a little bit earlier how the United States depends on China for critical minerals and metals that you need for semiconductors, that you need to build electric vehicles. Well, guess who also produces those? Canada. You depend on us for a lot and we are happy to work together, but it's got to be a two-way street. So you did negotiate with Trump and so you do have a sense of him and I'm wondering, what do you think is going on? Because the fentanyl reasoning is plainly not important. Canada, I think, sends 0.002% of the fentanyl that Mexico sends that passes through Mexico. It's all really coming because of American demand for it. He then talked about making Canada the 51st state. Obviously, again, not going to happen. What is he doing? What is he trying to do? Look, that is, of course, a question first and foremost for the president. You're totally right, for it, that the pretext for beating up on Canada are totally ludicrous. I think we all do know one thing about President Trump. The one thing he respects is strength and if he sees weakness, if he smells weakness, he pushes harder and harder and harder. And so what you are going to see, what America is going to see, what the world is going to see from Canada, is total strength, total unity, and a very smart surgical strategic approach. Now, you're an economist of sorts, you're very distinguished career as a writer and economics. When you look at where we are, a trade war between the United States and its closest ally, possibly the Peterson Institute says that this could produce inflation in the United States on a fairly significant scale. I think they have a chart that shows that it could go up to 3%, 4%. Is that leave you thinking, where entering a much less prosperous world, because economics is meant to be about win-win, not win-lose. This almost feels like lose-lose, because both economies, the US and Canada will be worse off after all this. Look, you're totally right. The path the US is on right now is a lose-lose path. And at the end of the day, you cannot defy the laws of economics. You're exactly right to say the people who are going to suffer from this the most are Americans, including the Americans who voted for Trump. I mean, the president has decided now to make gas in the United States more expensive. He's decided to make groceries in the United States more expensive. And our retaliation is going to cost Americans jobs. That it's completely ridiculous. We do not want to do this. And the right thing for Americans to do right now is to kind of shake their heads and say, guys, the Canadians actually are great partners. They're great neighbors. Let's not do this, because I want to tell you, Canada is formidable. We are resolute. We are determined. We know what we're fighting for. We don't want to have this fight, but we are not going to lose it. And finally, Krista Lemme ask you, you're very well plugged in to many North, to American CEOs. And a lot of the production that takes place car production, for example, is completely joint. I mean, these products auto parts go back and forth across the border. It's all kind of assemble in a North American supply chain. Are you hearing from them? This is the business community seems to me crucial here. Are you hearing from them that they're going to call up President Trump or let him know that this is bad for business, bad for American businesses like General Motors? I sure am. And as you know, a part in a car crosses the border six to eight times before that car is finished. Think about that. Think about what a tariff or does to Detroit. This is, you know, yesterday was a terrible day for Canada. It was a really black day for Detroit. This is going to be a very bad day for the stock market, which we know the president cares about a lot. And we're already hearing, for example, from the United Steel Workers, a really important constituency for the president. They've come out already and said, let's not do this. This is a bad idea. It's a bad idea for workers. And we've got to leave it. We've got to leave it. We've got to leave it more. Christopher Wheeler, always a pleasure to have you. Thank you. And we will be back. How are Jewish people around the world to reckon with the terrible suffering in Gaza over the last 16 months? That is the subject of a new deeply personal book by my next guest. Peter Bynard is a political thinker, a writer and a professor. He's also a religious Jew who attends an Orthodox synagogue. And his views on Israel have evolved over his lifetime from avid support to un-sparing critique. The book is called Being Jewish after the destruction of Gaza, a reckoning. Let me begin Peter by asking you since we've known each other a long time. I knew you when you were what I think one would have called a tough Jew. You were somebody who believed in a very militant Israel. What changed? And when did it change? It began to change the very first day that I spent with Palestinians on the West Bank. You know, I had gone to Israel all my life. Very important to me, very important to my family. I still love being in Israel. It's a very special place to me. And the first day I spent time with Palestinians in the West Bank, I realized I knew almost nothing about what Israel had meant to them. And the conditions under which they were living were more brutal than I had been able to imagine. And when I faced that head on, it began a process that has led me to a place that I really would not have expected. That leads me to an idea that many people in the Jewish community and the American politics think is radical and outlandish, which is the idea that all people should be treated equally under the law irrespective of their religion and ethnicity and race, which is the principle that we're struggling for in the United States. And that most American Jews emphatically believe in in every country except for in Israel, the very same American Jews can think that Israeli Jews cannot possibly be safe unless they rule in Israel, in a Jewish state, are placing our own children's safety, betting it on the principle of equality and the law here. And you know what? We are safer than Jews in Israel. Israel is the most dangerous place for a Jew to live of any large diaspora community. And I think that's because when you deny people their basic rights, you inflict tremendous violence on them. And that violence endangers you as well. Israeli Jewish political culture is become accustomed to supremacy. Legal supremacy over Palestinians is simply taken for granted and it is equated with safety. It is supremacy, it means safety, which is the same way that white South Africans filter in apartheid, the same way that white Southoners felt during Jim Crow, the same way that Protestants felt in Northern Ireland. The argument of this book is to those people to say, look at those other places. People became safer when everyone got a voice in government because when people have a voice in government, they don't need to take up arms to get the government to listen to them. You talk about the suffering in Gaza, but what do you make of the event that precipitated that suffering by which I mean the Hamas attack? And what does that tell you about Palestinians' willingness to live alongside Jews? That was one of the darkest days of my life. It was a trauma that still hasn't healed, probably will never heal for Jews in Israel, but also Jews around the world. We still have on our refrigerator door the names of all the hostages when we learn about them. We write whether they're still alive or whether they've been free. So there's no decent peace person can deny the horror of what happened. But one has to understand the context in which it happens. It has to understand that understanding context is not justification. And you can't understand how to prevent future October 7 without understanding the conditions in which Palestinians live. That human rights watch called this an open-air prison. That the United Nations says it would say it was unlivable for human beings. They were penned into a ghetto half the size of New York City they could never leave. And if you want to deal with that violence, you have to deal with structural oppression. Unfortunately, throughout human history, people who are brutally oppressed have responded in humane ways. And when you talk about being Jewish after the destruction of Gaza, do you think there's something particular that, how do you think, what is the Jewish obligation in witnessing this destruction? Well, this is being done in our name by a Jewish state. And I think what has happened in the Jewish world is that the state has become an object of worship. The state is treated as a God. In many Jewish institutions of the United States and Israel around the world, you are getting more trouble if you question the legitimacy of the state than if you question the authority of the Torah and the existence of God. There's something fundamentally wrong here. And I talk in the book about what Jewish tradition says about idolatry, which is the worship of anything that is created by human beings. When you say that a state has unconditional value, you are treating it as an idol. And so in the Jewish world, we insist again and again, and American politicians, does Israel have a right to exist as a Jewish state? And my point is the question she would be asking is, do the people who live under is really control have a right to exist? It's the life of the children in Gaza that we should consider of unconditional value. And then you ask, is this state doing a good job of protecting that life? And if not, maybe the state should be rethought. As a Jew, as a religious Jew, you are in a lonely place. I'm assuming that this argument is not easily received. And so you're not going to send a gogs and talking about this. Are you, do you have platforms? Not as many as I would like. Nobody likes a turn coat, a traitor, especially in people that imagines ourselves as a family, as I am, as a thing of us. And as a group, people who suffered a lot and still lives with the trauma of October 7th, the ongoing trauma that exists in Israel. But the thing that gives me hope is how many young Americans use I hear from who say, I feel betrayed by our community. I was raised to believe that Judaism believes in the infinite dignity and worth of all human life and that we believe in fierce and open debate. That's what they say. It means to be a Jew for them. And they say, I don't see that in our community. We need this dissent, loving dissent to be better versions of ourselves. And that note, Peter Bynar, pleasure to have you on. Thank you. Excellent. All right, we are going to move from the tragic world of the Middle East to technology of the future. I'll talk to the tech entrepreneur, Reid Hoffman, about deep sea and the promise of AI. This week on the assignment with me, Adi Cornish. The truth is that many of us warned about this. Reverend Gabriel Salgero, pastor of the gathering place in Orlando, Florida. What are the kinds of messages you've had been getting? I got a call from somebody saying that they're not going to go to church because they're afraid. Many pastors are concerned that it will impinge on our religious liberty to serve immigrant communities and make status communities. What does it feel like to be on the front lines of the immigration debate? Listen to the assignment with me, Adi Cornish, streaming now on your favorite podcast app. This panic in Silicon Valley are on the new AI model from the Chinese company DeepSeek. And this panic in many pockets of the world about the potential negative consequences of AI. But my next guest wants us to remain optimistic about the possibilities of this amazing new technology. And I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. I'm going to go to the conference. members are the way they're going to make a decision. It's going to be the first to ask you deep seat. You're going to have trusted your device, a little bit of a different perspective than the one I described. Tell me what you're basic takeaway from the deep seat. Well, the principle thing, I think, in your external article that I agreed with, was the fact that constraints do create good innovation opportunities. That's one of the things that we should all in the world, of training in a much more constrained environment that we lessons that come from that, we should learn those lessons as well. Doesn't mean you want to adopt those constraints. It's like, well, do you want to run a race with, like, weights tied around your ankles? It makes you stronger in some cases, but not always great on the race. So let's talk about the heart of the book. People look at AI and there's a lot of fears about it. But what you want to remind us is the promise. So when you think about it, what is the principle upside we should be thinking about with AI? So the principle thing is it gives us superpowers. And what's great, and this is part of why super agency, is when both you and I get the superpowers, we actually get more superpowers, not just the ones we get individually. So to think about what you can get with AI, a medical assistant that better than an average GP on every smartphone that runs for under $5 an hour. That is transformative. Most people don't have access to a doctor at 11 PM. Some people can go to emergency room. Right. And so how do you make that happen? A tutor on every subject for every age. And then of course, part of the work transformation is, I think with a very small number of years, when anyone deploys as a professional, those will play with AI agents helping them do what they're doing. That is part of the reason why we're in this cognitive industrial revolution and that thing that we're heading towards is super important. And when people hear this, they're going to think, okay, that's so great. Now what happens to the real doctors and nurses and you know, tutors? Is it possible, you know, it feels like there's a bit of a contradiction. It's going to do all these things that human beings did, but there's going to be no unemployment produced by it. Well, actually, I think there will be an all major technology transformations. There's transition points that are difficult and thus revolution classic. Let's try to do that smart. So jobs will get transformed. I think a lot of them will transform by a human will be replaced by a human using AI, but we can try to use AI to help that human being the human who's using AI for part of this. Now, for example, take a doctor. Sure, a GP, like a medical assistant and everyone, that's great. By the way, doctors, like most people get like five minutes with their doctor and so forth. Actually, if you walk in your doctor and the doctor says, hey, let your agent tell me what they've been talking to you about, oh, this is how I'm like, oh, let's focus on this in terms of what we're doing. It's not human or machine, it's human plus machine. In a lot of these cases. Now, that's there will be some replacement customer service, bunch of other things that will happen. But those countries, those industries which embrace this, will have the same mass of increase that happened during the industrial revolution. Why is it important that the United States stay ahead of China in the AI game? Is this at some level going to be a little bit like the internet where everyone's going to use it and does it really make a difference? I think it's actually very important that we make artificial intelligence, American intelligence, which is kind of the question of what are the values that are based on what is the norms, how is standards, how is it adopted in the broad world? And that's one of the reasons I think we want to bring along a lot of the world in this. And by the way, that's part of what I agree with you about in your article about, this is much more of a despotnik moment because this is not just my category. Yes, yeah. It's like, what is the global industrial, the cognitive industrial future look like? Jensen, who I'm the CEO of Nvidia, says, the rise of AI is going to be the revenge of the English major, because AI does coding very easily. And what used to be the great skill you wanted to have in the tech world was coding. His point is now it's going to be prompting the AI, which is a English skill. Do you buy that, that that actually, the power has shifted in this way? Broadly, yes, although it's actually English plus coding concepts. So no longer is it, oh, I'm an expert in C++, and I know how to do memory management, all the rest of this stuff, because the AI agent can do all that. And part of the transformation that I was saying, in terms of the transformation of work, is you and I, every professional, will have an AI coding assistant on our PC, on our phone. And so when we're doing like, oh, I want to do this analysis of this issue in world affairs, you can actually have it code up something specifically to do that analysis. And that will be part of how analysts work, how you interface with analysts. And so we all have coding assistants, is actually in fact part of the application of the professional work. Now, it's a colorful way to put it as the revenge of the English major. Now, do you think that question of how you think creatively in humanities is actually in fact an important thing that in? But you're still going to need to be thinking about in patterns of data, in patterns of code, as part of how you do that. So that mindset and skill set at an abstract level is still very important. So you still need science and the local arts, which is which Steve Jobs always said. Exactly right. Read often. Pleasure to have you on. Read always a pleasure. Next on GPS is China ready for an escalating trade war with the United States. We'll hear from a Chinese economist who says that Beijing is in a far stronger position than people realize. President Trump imposed 10% tariffs on China, which could bring about a major expansion of the trade war between the world's two largest economies. Last week at Davos, I sat down with KUjin, and associate professor economics of the London School of Economics. KUjin, pleasure to have you. Great to be with you, Farid. So you say that China is better prepared for a divorce with America than America. What do you mean by that? Well, China has long been preparing for less exposure to the US, diversifying it always, not just in terms of trading, partners, investment, but also currencies and payment system. And whichever president comes around, that plan hasn't changed. In fact, the first time around the Trump tariff wars have set off this complete globalization frenzy among the Chinese companies. 80's something percent of them have already implemented going abroad plans. So they're trying to create foreign markets that are not American and things like that. But still, there's a huge amount that they do so to America. And the tariffs would hurt, right? The tariffs will hurt both countries. But you've seen already a gradual kind of redirection of trade to other countries. In fact, if you look at the EV solar panels and all these, what they call new productive forces, very little that is actually going to the US. But it's totally pushed them to embrace new opportunities and signed new trade deals and new trading partners. And in fact, after the first time around Trump war, global trade has actually expanded. China's position in the world as a share of global exports has actually risen compared to before while US is declining. So I think China's responses while US is kind of going back, they're going to open up as much as possible. So this is why Premier Lee has repeatedly said, unilateral opening up, zero tariffs on the least developing countries. We should not underestimate the degree and the pace of fragmentation that is happening, multi-polarity and the rise of economic blocks. We're already seeing the data, whether it's investment or trade, the kind of the non-aligned blocks, with the aligned blocks and their interaction with each other. If you go around the world, you're asking the likes of Brazil or Asian countries, what are they saying the same thing? Diversify. Don't be at the mercy of the dollar or the US financial system. What do you make of the efforts that President Putin has made? Xi Jinping has talked about, which is to get away from the hegemony of the dollar that because the dollar is the international currency, almost 90% of transactions done in dollars. It means the US can levy sanctions, it can cut people out of the countries out of the system. And obviously China, Russia, even some other countries don't like that and want to escape it. So far, it's mostly been talk. Is it more than that now? I think it's much more than that. Whether it's quietly or not so quietly building up this huge financial infrastructure that's enabled by technology, blockchain technologies, the channels of alternative payment systems, digital central bank currency, that's actually happening at a much faster pace than we realize in that part of the world. China has signed 40 countries by lateral swap agreements to settle in the local currencies. Of course, these are marginal improvements, but you see the dollar slowly declining. And the fundamental question, even apart from financial sanctions, is that there's a dollar shortage. In emerging markets, a size of GDP is growing massively. The demand for dollars is there, there's not enough liquidity. So now the interest rate is high, the dollar is at a very high level. This actually has a huge financial implication on the developing countries. We're all looking to diversify. So do you think the Trump administration will be surprised at how resilient China is as it tries to put pressure on it? I think they will, I think first of all, the resilience of China has been demonstrated to a certain extent. The economic challenges are primarily internally driven, exports have actually performed quite remarkably. The other country is not so much, not so resilient. China is not so opposed to a Trump presidency because they still see Trump as somebody who they can negotiate with, that there's room for negotiation, and that there is some space to take the temperature down and to maintain the relationship. They've emphasized repeatedly mutual respect. That's not a high price to pay for the gains. Kijin, pleasure to have you on. Great to be with you, thank you. Thanks to all of you for being part of my program this week. I will see you next week. Have you heard you can listen to your favorite news podcasts, AdFree? Good news. With Amazon Music, you have access to the largest catalog of AdFree top podcasts, included with your Prime membership. To start listening, download the Amazon Music app for free. or go to Amazon.com slash AdFree News podcasts. That's Amazon.com slash AdFree News podcasts. To catch up on the latest episodes without the ads. There's a reason the sleep number smart bed is the number one best bed for couples. It's because you can each choose what's right for you whenever you like, firmer or softer on either side, sleep number does that. One side cooler and the other side warmer, sleep number does that too. You have to feel it to believe it. Sleep better together. And now, say 50% on the new sleep number limited edition smart bed, limited time, exclusively at a sleep number store near you. See store or sleep number.com for details."}