{"Episode Name": "Psychic Dr. Tamanna C Returns On TRS | Manifestation, Karma, Law Of Attraction & More", "Podcast Name": "Beer Biceps - The Ranveer Show", "Episode Link": "https://the-ranveer-show.simplecast.com/episodes/psychic-dr-tamanna-c-returns-on-trs-manifestation-karma-law-of-attraction-more-XKT0XeF3", "duration": "00:52:07", "text": " Do you think all of us end up encountering higher beings around us? We don't even know that we're interacting with the higher beings. All the time. Because of the scientific mind, we refuse to believe our own experiences. When one watches horror movies are the inviting things into there. Absolutely. The universe doesn't resonate with what you want, what you need. The universe resonates with what you're consuming. If you're consuming fear, you can do no by-based realities. You attract people who will make you feel that even more. How do you consume all these negative things in the full space? Can destiny be changed? Yes. Karma plays a very important role. What the universe brings to us is our karma. What we choose is our choice of freedom and the quality of our choices defines the rest of the week. That's exactly what life is. I just want God with me at all points. That's all I ask for at this stage. Right or wrong? That's every soul's desire. But... Every year we have a few guests that create waves in the world of podcasts and Dr. Tamana is one of those guests. She is a renowned psychic currently based out of Dubai. We've already created an extremely viral episode with her. This is the sequel to that very episode. I recommend you check out both but for now, this is the continuation of episode one on TRS with Dr. Tamana. By the time we're releasing this, you're already a superstar in the world of you too. How are you feeling? Good! You're always feeling good. Not feeling tired after the last conversation. You know, technically this is my third podcast of today. It's about 7.30pm. Yeah. Theoretically speaking, I would have been bombed out of my mind if someone told me that you have three podcasts. And all three podcasts are super high energy because these are the kind of conversations I live for. Thank you for being in the studio. Thank you so much for having me. Okay. There are a few topics I want to touch upon for this episode. Some highlights are the law of attraction and manifestation. Honestly, on some level, these words are so overused that they have upset to me a bit when I come across them in media when someone says law of attraction coach, it's a part of me that just withdraws. That might be my judgmental self. So we'll get to it, but we'll warm up the conversation first because I need to be a little less judgmental about this before approaching it correctly. Right. Okay. So let's begin this conversation and talk about stuff that we left off from the last time. Yes. It ended in a slightly darker place. I think the conversation became darker. About three years ago, we consciously chose to make a lot of a horror podcast. Yeah. And I felt like I was inviting those energies into my life after a point, which is why I actually stopped making as many horror podcasts and I still enjoy them. And then with the last episode and I was talking about the Illuminati and the D.A. going on, I truly believe that if there are people who are high frequency, I'm not saying this in an egoistic way, but people who meditate, we talk about things. You are creating some kind of a fertile ground for these energies to attract themselves to you. So if you talk about positive things, it's positive stuff. Absolutely. When one watches horror movies are the inviting things into their life. Absolutely. And again, this is going back to the first topic that you said, love attraction. What you consume is what you're going to get more of, whether you like what you're consuming or you're not liking it, you're going to get more of that. Do you want me to simplify that? Yes. You've come to my house for a meal runway and I've given you the all I've given you, Paneer, which is your favorite, and I've given you Bindi. But you don't like Bindi. Okay. And you love Paneer, but you're not consuming Paneer, you're consuming Bindi. Okay, I'll eat it fast. What am I going to serve more to you? Bindi. Why? Because in my head, since you're consuming that, in my head, I'm not going to go, he's enjoying it. But you are consuming it for a different reason. You're consuming it because you don't like it. You want to finish with that and jump onto having Paneer or that. That's how the universe works. The universe doesn't resonate with what you want, what you need. The universe resonates with what you're consuming. So, any, if you're consuming fear, if you're consuming insecurity, you're consuming stuff doubt, you're consuming anger, you're consuming low vibrational energies, you'll attract people who will make you feel that even more. How do you consume all these negative things in the first place? It just becomes a part of you, right? We get attached to these emotions. It's human to feel emotions. But we, as humans, love to victimize ourselves so much and dwell in that emotion. Okay, gotcha. Constantly thinking about it, listing the songs that remind you of that emotion. Absolutely. Going back to memories consciously. Going back to memories and also self-ictimization, which is so common. You don't know when I'm going through, you know, self-explanations to people, projecting the other person as a villain, projecting yourself as a victim, which we all at some point, everybody does in some space or the other. I think it begins by not voicing it out and not consuming it through content. That process of cleansing your mind and your spirit. The process of cleansing also comes from accepting that it's happened to you and also accepting that at some level, either conscious, subconscious, you have chosen that. And somewhere you've not exercised your choice of evil. You know, when you're in a bad relationship, when you're in a bad job, you know this is a bad toxic environment. But why don't we exercise our choice to get out of that situation? Tell the time you're completely pushed out. Why? Because we don't want to take responsibility. Because if we take responsibility, we won't be the victim. So not taking a choice is also a choice. Why do I feel like bringing metaphysics into this? That's perfect. Is there some linkage? To the law of manifestation and metaphysical or... Yes. Let's talk about what you studied when you were doing that degree in metaphysics. Yeah. What is metaphysics? So metaphysics is basically a bridge between human and the energy world. Explain in the scientific way. That's why meta means beyond its larger than life and physics is the scientific reason behind it. The role of atoms and molecules and plus and minus minus plus, science, plus and plus is plus. Plus and minus is minus. Do you agree? It's pure science. It's pure math. Now today, if you're working on the law of manifestation, say you say that I'm manifesting a Bentley. Okay? But your energy is of self-doubt. Your energy is impulsive financial decisions. Your energy is throwing money to please people. Your energy is getting attached to people's problems and throwing away money to help them or whatever. Will you be able to manifest your goal by saving up that much money and buying yourself a Bentley? Versus you want to manifest the Bentley. That's plus. But all the money that you make, you invest it wisely. You put it in the right places. Money grows money. You're going in the right direction. By the end of it, you will have enough money to manifest your Bentley. Now the same thing applies to the energetic world. Any kind of manifestation that's understandable at manifestation is. Manifestation, before it comes in the physical world, it will always manifest in the energetic world. Okay? How you manifest, how when you create podcasts? Of course, you're more candid, but then there's a framework. It's in your head and then it manifests in the physical conversation. When we make buildings, when we do anything, it's always on paper or a blueprint or in your head. And then the physical actualization happens. So whenever you want to manifest anything, materialistically, spiritually your relationship buys or romantically, it will first come in the energy world. But how you convert that into the physical world depends on your efforts and your frequency? So if you have a thought, if you have a vision for your life, that's already been created up there. Yeah. That's a reality in that world. Yeah. If you want to take that reality and paste it onto your real human reality, what's the process? It's a long process. Okay, let's begin by a simple question. What can go wrong? Like there's everyone wants to be rich. So in some metaphysical reality, everyone's already rich, but not all of those metaphysical realities become human realities. True, but also I would also like to add here is karma plays a very important role. And I'll explain to you how. If in your karma is to own a car, you will get the car. The when you start doing the law of manifestation, you'll get it sooner than later. So you're just acting or speedening up the process in time dimension. But your choices are free will or what vibration you are vibrating at makes a lot of difference. So I'll give you an example again, taking you want to buy a Bentley. Now the universe will throw you opportunities for new jobs. But if you're rigid, if you're scared, if you're insecure, you're too comfortable with one leg job and you don't want to take a risk. You will be able to buy a car, but instead of a Bentley, you'll be able to buy a cheaper car. If you take the risk, if you have self-faith, you work hard, you know, you save you invest wisely. Then you'll be able to buy a Bentley. So law of manifestation will only get you what is the part of your karmic chart, but at a higher order, lower frequency. If in someone's chart, they are not, they're starting to have a car. Even if the car comes to them, they will not be able to sustain it. If that was the case, run be it, then no one would work. Everyone would be sitting in temples and churches manifesting. Think about it, right? If the power of manifestation was, I want to marry Bill Gates. I want to marry you Shahrukhana. I want to marry Tom Cruise. Then you can only imagine, right? No one would go to work. Then all the effort that we are putting at work, we would be sitting at home and manifesting. Even the law, even the teachers teaching the law of manifestation, they don't have a perfect life. Why haven't they manifested a perfect life? You know, when I see someone filming themselves as a manifestation coach or a law of attraction my first question is that why does this thing need coaching? It needs coaching just to make people aware of certain facts. Number one, number two to manifest, you don't need techniques. You need to vibrate at a higher frequency. Okay, I have another hard hitting question, not to you. Yeah. It's, it's a universe. And maybe this question is being formed because of my subjective reality. I believe that hard work can accomplish anything. But of course, I'm talking from my own life's perspective, where I've seen that constant hard work and discipline has unlocked everything and much more. So I would copy paste that reality to every human souls journey. But if you want something work towards it, that's what kind of bothers me on some level about when it comes to manifestation. I believe in it. I know it's real. But I feel people use it as an excuse to not work hard. So would you say that one of the first illusion when it comes to the law of attraction? Is that keep your hard work and discipline going? You need to keep working hard. You know, like I keep seeing so much of social media content, right your manifestations on a paper, put it underwater, put it under your pillow. Again, if we all could manifest by doing all of that, no one would have to work a single day. Number one, number two is before I move, I'm going to simplify manifestation and come back to karma, choice of evil and destiny. Now today, if you've taken science in school and you have a physics exam, your test paper is your karma. You don't get to choose what is going to come in the paper, do you agree? You get to choose the answers. So say you pick the right answer. You have 100 questions while you select the right answer. So karma is your examination paper. Your answers are out of your choice of evil, your intelligence, intellect. Whatever you've studied. So that's choice of evil. Destiny is how much you score. You get a 99% 100. Your destiny is a Ivy League, IIT, IIT, I am aeronautical engineering, X, Y, Z, whatever you want to pick up. But what if you score 22, even the 22 is not based on karma, it is based on your answers. Will you go to an Ivy League or an IAM? IAM. Now eventually the person who goes to IIT or a person who goes to a normal mediocre college will also get a job. But the one who goes to IIT will be making final acts a month. Well, someone who's going to a mediocre or an average college will make 50,000 a month. They both have got jobs. They both have studied engineering. But the quality of life depends on the choices they gave in the examination paper. They do not have control over the questions. They only have control over the answers. That's exactly what life is. Options, what the universe brings to us is our karma. What we choose is our choice of evil and the quality of our choices defines our destiny. Can destiny be changed? Yes. How? By being more wise because your what is spirituality? Becoming aware. What what I mean when we talk about high vibrational frequency, intellect, wisdom, it's all to bring our awareness so that we give the right answer so that we deal with situations in a better way. Can karma be changed? No, can you change your question if you don't know the answer? You can change your destiny. You can change your choice of free. Well, so even the law of attraction works on this. What is in your karma will come to you. How soon or later and at what frequency and when I say frequency, I'm talking about the quality. Sastigari, mangigari, cheap, expensive, I really college, normal government college. That quality will depend on our choice of free. So there is an element of destiny for sure. Absolutely. You can amplify or de-amplify that version of destiny. Yes. So if you're destined to have a road accident, either you'll have a road accident that kills you. Yeah. Or if your karma is good and you consciously manifest a long life, yeah. Maybe the road accident will just enjoy you a little bit. Sure. And that's why what we did in the first episode, karmic chart reading, that's what I do for my clients. When they come to me, I tell them they are highs and lows. So according to that, they can change the quality of their life. You mean worst case and or your best case and or. Now, okay, for example, if someone's health cycle is low and I tell them this month, your health cycle is low, they will be more careful. The minute they start getting 99 fever, they'll be like, she said, so let me pop up. Let me go to the doctor. Let me get my blood test done. So that's how. Imagine if I tell you that, okay, this talk is going to hit roof in west. Won't you invest? And if I tell you that this talk is going to go low, don't invest. You won't invest. That's exactly what highs and lows of life are. So when I tell you that your love cycle is going to be low during this period, you can cut down the intensity of the heartbreak by being prepared. Kia, I have to go through this. Let me not overreact. Let me not call it off or whatever. You know, let me not take it to personally if it gets called off. You know, and if in a good period, if I tell you that, okay, Ranveer, this is the very good period for you to expand your work, get into new tie-ups, collaborations and those opportunities come. You make the most outfit. If your period is low and if they, your podcasts are getting delayed or meetings are not happening as per schedule, then you set your expectations accordingly or you don't invest your energy, emotionally in that space. So by the end of it, like we said, for humans, money is everything, for soul, energies, everything. How today we move the world around to conserve our money? For a soul, these are ways to conserve energy. Because you don't know how many lifetimes you've worked hard to be in the body that you are. Yes, not everybody deserves his body. I have to go back to a surface level of thinking. Yeah. For the average everyday person wants to apply the law of attraction. Okay, so they have a vision of having a big mansion at some point. The basis of it is to work hard and have discipline and take steps in that direction. So every time options are shown to you, you have to recognize reality responding to your prayer and then walk in that direction. And if you do that long enough with the same amount of discipline and intensity, all those manifestations have a chance at becoming true. Absolutely. Now, what are those? Number one, believing first of all that you deserve it. Number two is your intention for wanting it. That intention is everything. Even if you don't voice it out ever, the universe knows your intention. The universe knows your intention. If you want to buy a new car or you want a palatial house to put somebody down, to prove a point, to be superior, you won't get it. And that will probably start happening to you. So that's the energy you're putting out here. I want to come ready to show him down. Someone else to show you that. Absolutely. Apps work 100%. If your intention is because I enjoy it, because I want it, it's for me, then do it. Ask for something and forget about it. But ask for it for yourself, not to prove a point to the world. Third is you need to surrender. You cannot keep chasing it. When, when, when. That trust and surrender in the universe is very important. And fourth is rather than you pulling it down as in. You need to ask the universe certain intentions, affirmations that we work with, prayers, what we call certain powerful words. What are affirmations? Affirmations are nothing but simple words put in a certain way that it creates a high vibrational prayer or a sentence. That's an affirmation. Dear universe, I ask you to bring to me people, situations, job opportunities, work opportunities that will bring in financial stability, financial peace, so that I can afford my dream house and give me the power to sustain it. It's the same prayer. God, I want a house. I want a house. But do you see how the combination of certain words create a very different frequency? And that's what affirmations are. So that really works because when you start saying these affirmations, you are telling God that I want the house, but at the same time, I am open to receiving what I need to do and work on in order to afford that house. So you're coming from a space of wanting to work hard rather than coming from a space of entitlement. People do this law of manifestation from the space of entitlement that now I'm doing the law of manifestations show, so it should come to me. You know what I mean? And the second thing is sustaining it. I'll give you a link. This is someone I know. Wanted a fancy car, got a fancy car, ODE-6. Very excited, very happy. After six months, the side mirror broke. 35,000 spent on that. After one year, one tire went off. Four lakhs for that. S.A.S.A. Kartekarte. By the time it was 18 to 20 months, the person sold the car, saying I cannot afford it. So sometimes you get what you want or what you're asking for. But you may not have the money energy will to sustain it or afford it. When I say sustain it, I'm talking about relationships. I'm talking about job. You may get your dream job, but the environment people will be so toxic that you won't be able to sustain in that environment. From a very actionable perspective, a college kid who's listening to this podcast. Yeah. Okay, I think the college kid has understood that he or she needs to work hard. Yeah. I'm pretty sure they've already manifested it in the spiritual realm. Yes. The thinking of cars and houses and partners. What else can they do? What's an actionable? Being open to receiving without any resistance or rigidity. Often people, when they ask for something and when the universe gets it to them, it can come in any form. It could be in form of a friend telling you that, oh, you wanted one internship. There's an offer in my company. But if the friend says that, no, no, I'm not meant for internship. I'm only going to get a MNC job. That means he's rejecting something that the universe sent to him. Maybe through that internship, he could have got some other better job and made more money. You need to keep your eyes open for incremental forward steps. Yes. So once you've thought of it and you're sure that you're going to work hard, look out for the opportunity that will come your way, because that's getting you to your manifestation. But not how exactly you want it. Sure. That's where we go wrong, right? With a lot of judgments, perceptions, assistance, it should be perfect. I want that perfect job. There's nothing like perfect. There's just incremental upward steps. Yes. This is something you learn over long-term career. That's something you learn by age 30. Sure. You spoke about affirmations. I think there are people who've understood affirmations. I think affirmations, according to your explanation, were also a manifestation of the same thought of incremental and highly practical steps to get to your end goal. Sure. Right? Absolutely. You just took that one sentence of here, I want a fancy car to God give me financial stability. A higher vibrational sentence. So an example of a lower vibrational sentence would be a sentence come prized by lower vibrational words like, please don't let me be poor. Yeah. I want to impress the girl. I want to reach car. I want to expensive car. I want to reach a big house. It's different, right? I really want to be rich. You really want to be rich. That's a negative. Yeah. God make me wealthy. Give me the ability to attract wealth. And whenever you want to attract anything, wealth, relationships, house, job, always ask for the power and strength to sustain it. That is the closing statement. Yeah. That's what I was about to say. This is the final statement in this whole. Yes. Ask for the ability to gain it and keep it. You can also ask for the wisdom to recognize the opportunity sent by the universe. Do you think we've given people enough tools? Yeah. Absolutely. So you write this down on a piece of paper. Write it down to a piece of paper. You can even say it. It just become your mantra. You can say it once a day. It's not about how many times you say it. You can say it in the middle of the night when you wake up. Doesn't matter. But do it with full intention. See, I mean, I'm not trying to go on a whole year then now angle here. But I've met enough monks on the show and I've seen enough shit in my own life to come to the conclusion that this is just how I look at it. I just want God with me at all points. That's all I ask for at this stage. Write or wrong? That's absolutely right. And that's every soul's desire because that's a soul's right. God is what? A high vibrational energy is the most powerful energy from where our soul comes. So your desire is not wrong. But in order for you to connect to God, you constantly need to be connected to the spirit because it is the spirit that is connected to God. Not run deep as the ego of personality. It's your spirit that is connected to God all the time. What if this is my only prey over the rest of my life? That's okay. But then you will attract people, situations, opportunities that will push you to connect to your spirit all the time that will be connected to that God. Suffering? Not necessarily. Not you do not have to. You know, suffering is how our emotions react to situations. If you're connected with your spirit with just the basic practice, that is enough. You know, people ask me when we would do I do? Do I meditate? I don't meditate. My daily practice is of course a lot of visualization and energy protection. But my two mantras that I start my day with and my cup of coffee or tea. That is my view of connecting with my spirit. That is meditation for me. I don't sit on the mat. I used to meditate a lot now. I meditate with my eyes open. But for me, it's just that cup of coffee or tea that's me and my spirit time. Yeah. Your family is from India. So you're very familiar with Indian practice. We brought up Shiva so much on the last episode. You spoke about Saraswati, Kali, all that in the last episode. There will be people who listen to what you just said in the previous section and think that, hey, this is too westernized for me because that's how a lot of people spiritual journeys begin to it discovers some stuff. It works for them. It is genuinely spiritual and then a spiritual ego develops that he might spirituality is better than hospitality. And I know for fact that there are listeners thinking this as we speak. Yeah. Which is a test for them. Secondly, it's a reminder from the universe that they need to travel abroad and understand that spirituality is present in different forms across different cultures. Now specifically for you, you're in Dubai. I didn't like Dubai back in 2014 or 15 when I was also too young to understand what's happening. It just looked too fancy to me. And when I when they post the lockdown, it changed into a country full of expats, people bringing the culture, the intellect, their experiences, their spirituality to that one city. So I love the city now. Like I look forward to winning the by all the time. What have you learned about global spirituality while being a brown person? A lot. So pre **** I used to travel. At that point, I never know Zoom calls or phone calls. People wanted to physically meet you. I used to travel to Bangkok for clients. I had office in Turkey. Every once in three months, I would be in Turkey, Singapore. Dubai was every 45 days. So Dubai has been a very old base. It's been home for me. And I also lived in London for four years. So in terms of spirituality, it's the energy. It's the collective consciousness. The collective consciousness in Bangkok or Singapore is very, very different from what it was in Turkey. You know, Turkey because of the war that had happened by dance. I would, Turkey every time I would go, I would just not be myself. My energies for I would just I just couldn't sleep. You know, Bangkok, in spite of being overpopulated and busy, I was sleeping better there. It's a collective consciousness. Now pre **** London was one of the best cities to live in. But now because of the war, people are migrating there. They are coming with their traumas. It's adding to the collective energy of that space. You felt it. I felt it. I absolutely felt it. You know, and I'm not primarily only talking from a physical safety perspective. I'm talking about the energetic perspective also. So that adds to the collective consciousness. Now the energies in Dubai, like you said, more expats. It stands for oneness. It stands for no judgment. You know, and also because it's a very rich city, everyone's happy people are not operating from a space or greed competition, jealousy. Yes, everyone wants more, but they're also happy with what they've got. There's enough for everybody. So that also adds to the consciousness. Can we talk a little bit about the awkward aspect of Islam? Sure. A little bit based on whatever you've learned. Yes. I have a lot of Muslim friends who have spoken to a little bit about this stuff. They have a concept of gins. Yeah. It's in the Quran. Yes. What I loosely understand is that the word gins brackets a lot of low entities together. There are different kinds of gins. It also might include higher entities that help you out in some manner. Yeah. Do you want to open up this topic about gins? Absolutely. Absolutely. So in the Quran, they even talk about pharistas. Yeah. So gins are basically entities. And pharistas are equivalent to what Christianity calls angels. You know, you have Michael, even in the Quran, you have Rafael, Uriel, in different names, even in the Quran. So it's just an equivalent to that. It's the same energy, but a different term given to them. Now, in terms of gins, it's what even tantrics you do, even the Hindu tantrics too. They capture, discover and Hindi may bust make a nah. Animism. Animism. They capture and use that energy so that they can vibrate higher for whatever good bad ugly business that they're doing. So because energy to manifest good also, you need energy to manifest bad also, you need energy. So today, if I want to harm you, I want to destroy you. I need a certain amount of high energy to channelize it with a negative intention. Does that make sense? And that's what gins do. That's what tantrics also do. They're using the energy of these beings, I won't call them humans, but beings, to channelize it in a negative way. I practice myself. I am in the middle of my sardhana. The one cute thing I've learned about sardhana dharma is that you need to have your own personal relationship with God and have conversations with Hanuman, you have conversations with Kalber of it makes it makes your sense of ritual much more colorful. I don't like admitting this, but it helps with manifestation as well. Absolutely. I agree with you. And also they respond. Yes. They are just waiting for you to call upon them. That's what a lot of Hindus around me may not be doing. That's what I sense a lot. Yeah. A lot of them are actually doing the puja, saying the mantras, but it's not enough to say the mantra like a parrot. Yeah. You need to understand the money, you need to feel it, you need to contemplate upon it. But most of all, you need to have an equation with God. You need to have faith that it exists in reality, then it has existed in mythology. I've had my future predicted through tarot cards once and it was an experience. I was convinced because I saw the card reader shuffling the cards really fast. Yeah. And then a few cards fell apart by themselves. Yeah. And sometimes she'd shuffle it pretty aggressively, but the same card would fall out. Okay. That's a message. So tarot card works. It's beautiful. Some people read coffee mug. Rones. It's all a beautiful science. What is Rones? Rones is basically some stones where the reader can pick up the messages in the positioning of the stone and read it. But everything, the predictions, the purity of it all depends on the reader. So today, if you meet three tarot card readers and the same card comes out, they all three will have a different message or a different prediction or a different interpretation. Even astrology, you have an authentic style. So the same position, same plan, it's a reason, but they will read in different angles or different directions. There is an element of human intuition that comes into those practices, right? So you just need to be sure about the person that you're going to. True. True. And not everyone will have clean intention. Not everybody will have clean intentions and also run where I think in the very recent age, because some people are doing very well in spirituality, people think it's a money business. So for them, how back in the day it used to be engineering, doctor, architect, lawyer, graphic designer, fashion designer, now spirituality has just become another path that lets too few courses, let's get certification. And then we can chart people do that. People will do a course on tarot card reading and call themselves tarot card readers or hypnotherapy. And it takes years and years and years of practice just because you can cook does not make your your master chef. Anyone can cook. That does not mean it makes your master chef. Do you think all of us end up encountering higher beings around us? All the time. In city life and we don't even know that we're interacting with the high people. All the time. And it's not necessary that they'll be materially successful, right? Absolutely. It might be your mega orchic noul maybe. Absolutely. And like I, again, I go back to faith. It's all about faith. Today we encounter, but because of the scientific mind, the logical mind, and my hallucinating, is it my imagination? Is it an illusion? We refuse to believe our own experiences. Can you bring in that conversation we spoke about in that room about star systems? Star scenes. Star scenes. Where did you first come across the theory of star scenes? When I was a child that phase of 9, 10, 11 growing up, we used to live on the ground floor, our door, our house, who had access to the parking, which was our parking. So every night I would take my grandmother's to put a spider around my and go and lie down on the roof of Miramaruthie 800 and look at the stars and I would get very attracted. I was very attracted to the cosmic. And that's why I wanted to be an aeronautical engineering because of my love for astronomy. And then when I got my initiation done, when I was 16, not when I was 9, but when I went to my other initiation, I bought it up with my master because he touched upon how you have entities, ETs, you have souls from different planets, different stars. It exists. Different constellations, different galaxies. And that's how I started reading more into it. Can we dial back a little bit and can you give context to you on the different star systems and what star seeds are in the first place? Okay. So apart from earth, humans are or not, anyone who's outside of earth, we call them ETs, extraterritorial beings and again, they're a positive, they're a negative, they're also. Same as aliens. Same as aliens. Or are these inter-dimensional? No, same as aliens. Okay. But different forms. Now, aliens are basically what humans are, extraterritorial energies in an alien body. Now, a series like a star seed will not be an alien body, right? So it's like that. Tomorrow, if a star seed can come in human for a series, can come in human form also and can also be on another realm or another planet or another galaxy in alien form also. It's a soul. It's a soul. Okay. A soul from a particular star system. That's just, yeah. What does that mean? So they, so life exists on stars, right? And there are powerful stars, not every star that you see, life exists. So you have series, series A, series B, you have palladium, which is another star seed. Star rather, then you have arcaturius, you have Andromeda. And each star holds a certain quality. So star seeds who come from series come to bring in healing their volunteers. They try to make the human smoke consciousness. The sun is a star as well. So is Andromeda, all these. Now, when we're talking about Andromeda, the star, it has its own solar system, right? There might be a planet like the Earth, which is habitable. So when you say that someone's a star seed, are you also saying that that soul from that star system usually takes birth within that solar system? Yeah. But for this one lifetime, it's come down to our solar system. Yes, it can be one lifetimes. It can be many lifetimes. So you're saying that there is a solar system, there's a habitable planet. And those souls are usually born within that solar system. Yeah, there are souls of that to return. So fair to say that we have souls which are of this origin and this solar system, normal human beings. Normal human beings. What we call Earth, Earthlings or Earth beings. You had an astral travel experience as a kid. Yeah. What is astral travel? Astral traveling happens on different brands. The soul is conscious, not your body. The soul consciously leaves the body. The soul is always at work. So when your body is sleeping, the soul still wants to achieve more. Study more, meet family, learn, rest, go to the other side and come back, so on and so forth. So when the soul consciously does that, leaving your body and coming back, that's astral traveling. I have done readings and dreams. My clients taught me Tamana, we dreamt of you and in the dream you were giving me this message. And it actually happened that way for them. So there can be so many. And even when I was a kid, I used to put a book under my pillow and say, I used to travel a lot astral traveling. I used to download information, study, you know. So yeah. Do you think the internet is ready for this kind of information? I think it is because to be honest when we are many, many, many people experience what I've experienced, but either they don't really know what's happening and they're in denial or even if they've accepted it, they don't know who to talk about it. Because if they talk to someone who doesn't understand it, they'll be told, it's a lot, they're mad, they're weird. Are you hallucinating? And experiences are very personal, right? You know how we spoke about these four star systems and we're talking about how beings are reborn in our realm with a purpose. Is there a flip side to this conversation where they could be negative? Star systems as well and negative beings are born. Because they all have consciousness and even souls who have done negative in the past lives are all being born or if at all they're incarnating, they're incarnating with a far more higher consciousness knowing that they have the power to choose otherwise. And right now the world that we're living in at this point, all of the humans are the oldest form of souls that exist because like we were discussing every soul, you're right now on an average is at least minimum 70, 50 to 70 lifetimes old up to thousands of lifetime old. How do you identify a really young soul? It's easy to identify an old soul. Yeah. How do you identify a young soul? They're very innocent, very gullible. They don't know the world. They're they're not grounded. They can get swayed by emotions, society. They don't have a mind of their own. Always dependent on others, approval, decision. They're, you know, there's a lot of fear to take independent decisions. Fear to come out of the shell. They constantly feel unsafe. I can't do it to say by alone self confidence. But at the same time, the part of them, the frequencies, pure, they are high vibrational beings because they've not encountered that much baggage, right? Because they are relatively new. But on earth in human form, everything is new. So there's a major dichotomy. You think right before this, they win the animal birth? No, they're all in human forms. Before their first human birth could be. But right now on earth, there's not a single new soul. Not someone who in their last lifetime was a dog and has come. They're all relatively old souls. Like I said, the new soul will also be 50. And that's what they say, Kaliovna. When do you enjoy history? Yeah, yeah. So when you're studying history, I love figures like Alexander the Gate, Jengiskan, you know, Chata Bhatti-Shiva Giamara, all these people. Because of the kind of conversations we've had on the show, I've come to kind of view long-term history from a slightly metaphasical perspective. I personally believe that there've definitely been lower beings and higher beings at plain long-term history. Yeah. That's about to ask if you agree or not. Yeah. To just agree. Any part of the sea that you want to open up a little bit? So I don't want to touch upon a specific part because then again that comes with so much of controversy. But then every soul has a purpose. Okay. Today, there could be so many psychics in the world. But what I do, maybe they can't do or what they do, I can't do. Doctors, there could be 10 cardiologists in the world. Every person, every doctor, every skill has its own unique USB. Okay. And also people like these that you named, they are all very gifted. See, everybody's gifted. Everybody on earth is gifted. But what brings them out the way it does or what converts their gift into profession. Or what makes them successful or excellent in their gift is how they develop human skill sets that go hand in hand with their gift. So it's not just important to be talented. It's important to learn to work with people. It's important to learn to work with people and also honor that gift. Believe in that. And when I say skill set, it's all about karmic lessons. Today, I'll give you a layman. Now today, if you want to study engineering or you say that you want to become a surgeon, will you become a surgeon by taking up arts or economics in college? No. You will have to use science biology. Correct? Versus if you want to get into theta or drama, you will take up arts. You know, you're not going to take up engineering and then professionally get into. So even with our professions, even with our life purpose, life purpose will not come to you till the time you have learned those lessons and reach that point. It will not be revealed to you. Do you become an engineer just because you want to become an engineer or do you become an engineer? Because you've learned and studied and passed out with flying colors. All of these names that you to call the historic, you know, famous people, they all have skill sets. They all are gifted. But some people developed a good skill set. Some people didn't develop a good skill set and that's when they went haywire. You've just given the guideline to becoming a historical throughout this episode. Sure. And also coming back to what skill sets? Now today, they are virtues that we need to develop. Today, if your purpose or if your career is at the podcast, you need to have the gift or lesson of being communicative. You need to have to learn the lesson of being organized. You need to have the lesson of trusting your gut when you're talking to somebody else. You need to have to learn the lesson of work-life balance. You need to have to learn the lesson of being flexible because not every guest is going to tell you what you want to hear. You know, so you've built on those lessons. So those are certain soul virtues. But even in the human form, theme work, organization, you need to be polite, you need to be humble, you need to be grounded. You know, you cannot have throw your anger tantrums. You have to master your anger. You cannot be egoistic. You know? So you've managed to learn these skillsets. Some of them have been very naturally coming to you. But some, it's been a conscious practice, right? And a challenge. And a challenge, but that's what karmic lessons are. This whole career has really forced me to grow as a human because you're selling so much of your own mind and creativity that you'll only be able to sustain if you're working on your mind and you'll create a very constantly. So, and also, I think what you're doing is also trying to bring out the best of the people you invite on this show that the world is not seen. That's the natural gift. Always enjoy human beings. Almost get a high when I'm able to do that. I'm so happy I met you in life just on a human level. I'm even happier that I get to podcast with you. It's been a nothing but pleasure. Thank you for making this happen. Thank you so much for having me. Hope to see you very, very, very soon. As you see in the bio inshaAllah. inshaAllah. Thank you. Thank you so much. That was the episode with Dr. Tamana ladies and gentlemen. This is a topic that I love exploring. Always looking for names associated with tarot, with the world of psychics, with the world of the occult, sending your guest recommendations. Lots more episodes just like this are coming your way. by soon. We link all of Dr. Tees Hanners down below, make you follow her on her social media hydras. And until next time guys, from Ranbir in the team, we'll see you later."}