{"Episode Name": "REAL Lord Hanuman's Story: Valmiki Ramayana Part 3 | Yashodeep Deodhar | TRS", "Podcast Name": "Beer Biceps - The Ranveer Show", "Episode Link": "https://the-ranveer-show.simplecast.com/episodes/real-lord-hanumans-story-valmiki-ramayana-part-3-yashodeep-deodhar-trs-fCRGEZ6k", "duration": "01:56:37", "text": " I think this is the episode that many Hanuman bugs especially were looking forward to when it comes to Sanatana or any deity with the face of an animal. They closer to earthly realms and they come to help you much quicker. Out of everyone, if there's anyone who can do this, it is Shri Hanuman. When I say Hanumanji, what are you visualizing when it comes to the face? A forest dweller who puts on some type of a face mask to look like a monkey. Something that they could take off and also a lot of stories related to the tale. So they also wore a tale. The first love that Hanumanji felt for Shira. Is that mentioned up to this point? Remember, he gave his ring to Hanuman. In fact, he said to Lakshman, anyone who has an ambassador like that is a very fortunate king. Is there anything written about his emotional state of mind? He was at the lowest point when he did. The moment Hanumanji appears in the text, the energy of your own mind changes. Like as we are speaking right now, the energy of the room is so different. Is your understanding of Hanumanji also evolving? The beauty of Walmik is poetry such we know he went through me. But the image left in our mind is of Hanuman flying through the sky. Is there anything that said about his increase in size? If it was real, would he need to fly or swim? He could have stepped across. Those bumps. Nothing said about Shira, this point. Her reality. Their accesses surrounding Shira, threatened her very clearly. We are going to cut you up and they were discussing who will eat which part and that they should divide the part secretly. Why do they not see Hanumanji? Just go away with Hanumanji. Come on, ask, sir. Why don't you come with me? She says... This is a very special part three of our four parts special on the Ramayan. If you haven't seen the first two parts, that's okay. This one is centered around the legend of Hanuman. I think that Hanumanji as well as the Ramayan in general isn't completely understood by most Indian audiences. In today's episode, we welcome Jashore D Ramayan, the actual and only honest retelling of the story of the Ramayan, the legend that actually took place, the ithihas or history of India. This four parts series has been made with a lot of pure intention. The final episode is going to release in two days time and this double whammy that we have this week concludes our retelling of the Ramayan for the 2025 audience in podcast form. The intention is for all of these four episodes to be relevant for the next 50 years. So if you're someone who's clicked on this episode for Hanumanji and his secrets, of course you're going to find the real description of his role in the Ramayan. And trust me, there's a lot of myths that will be broken over the course of these two episodes. This is our Hanuman special in our Ramayan series with Jashore D with Arso and it begins right now. Yes, Jaira. Jaira, Jaira Hanuman. Jaira Hanuman. Welcome back. So this epic series has reached episode three. How are you, sir? Very good. Thank you. I think this is the episode that many Hanuman books, especially we're looking forward to the most perhaps of the whole series. This is where Hanumanji gets introduced. Let's just start with a tiny recap and review on the first two episodes of our series. How are you feeling about it? Wonderful. Great to be back here and to narrate the original Walmi Kiramain. Iti Hasa. Yes. And you know, in terms of what you asked about a recap, I think two or three important points to remember as we get into episode three. The first is that this is the Walmi Kiramain. It may be a bit different from the popularly known versions of the Ramayan. But if the question is what really happened, then the reference text is the Walmi Kiramain because this is the iti Hasa. Also in the very first episode, you had asked me the question, why did Marjivalmi Kirai and I think that's important to keep in mind throughout our discussion. Marjivalmi Kirod this because he wanted to set the highest example of what it means to be a good human being. He had started off with the question, Kohan Vasmin, Samh Pratamlokay, who in the world lives today, who has the following qualities and really the qualities were universal human values. So that's the objective that we have in front of us, the highest example of behavior. And we keep that example in front of us and be the best that we can be. So that's the purpose. Now in terms of the qualities, the great qualities that he talked about, earlier on, Sri Ram exemplified acceptance. On the day that he was sent into exile for no fault of his and he was the rightful successor. He went from having it all, lordship over the entire world to having nothing at all for no fault of his again. It was unfair to him, but he accepted it without any anger, without any irritation. Right? So he exemplified acceptance. In the last conversation we had, we saw his reaction when Sita was kidnapped. That was not the time for acceptance. He did not say, oh, it is Sita's karma. So she got abducted. It is my karma to go back to Ayodhya. No, he said, I will find out wherever she may be and I will get her back safely. Right? This was the time for action. And he exemplified that. We spoke a bit about karma as well. So Sri Ram is exemplifying that yes, acceptance is important, but only after you have done everything possible, all possible actions. And that is what they are setting out to do right now. So in the last conversation, Sita got kidnapped, Ram and Lakshman are coming south to find her. And they have been told that they must meet Sugriv at the Rishamuk mountain and he will be able to help them find her. Could you draw out a visual again, a geographical visual as well as an aesthetic visual? What are we supposed to visualize here? Okay. So geographically they started in northern India, in Ayodhya where the story started. And then into exile, they came straight south towards Shungaverpur, crossed over the Ganga, went to the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna at Prayag. From there they crossed the Yamuna as well and came to Chitra Kutt. They spent some time at Chitra Kutt. Afterwards they came to Panchavati, which is in Western India, not too far from here at Nasak. Sita was kidnapped at Panchavati and Raman has taken her south. That's what we know from Jatai, you. So they start coming south and now we are in the vicinity of Hampi in modern day Karnataka, Rishamuk mountain and Pampalik. So that's the geographic layout. And in terms of visuals, if you've been to Hampi, this is a landscape of boulders and some forests, huge boulders, reddish brown in color, dark brown and also forests. So in this mountainous area near the Pampalik, also near the Tunga-Bhadra river, will be the story of today's podcast. Have you been to Hampi? Yes, yes. And to the Rishamuk mountain, so searching for Sita, they come towards Pampalik. And this is where the first saga of the Kishkinda Khan starts. This is the stunningly beautiful Pampalik in spring, wasan-thrathu. How do you feel? The Pampalik that they show today is and we will see the descriptions of the Pampalik. It's much smaller what we see today compared to the descriptions that we've had. So surely there's been some change over time. Okay, let's move on in the story. Right. Merci Walmiki describes the beauty of Pampa at the same time for Siram, there is no joy in all this, only the searing heartache of Sita's loss. So Siram is describing the beauty of Pampal tulakshman, at the same time he's feeling pain as well. It's a very beautiful saga. Siram says, look at those crystal clear waters of the Pampa. How the wind smacks the water, creates ripples and then because of the ripples, the lotuses dash against one another. And he's reminded of Sita. He says, Sita loves the lotuses. Her eyes are just like lotus petals. The wind comes whistling out of the mountain valley. It shakes the trees and then seems to play with the flowers. And when the wind comes with its fragrance, Siram is reminded of Sita. So he says, this wind is just like Sita's breath. But this cool fragrant wind burns me like fire because it reminds me of Sita. So everything that is joyful is giving him pain. He says, look at the peacocks, beautiful feathers shining brilliantly. But of course he'll be dancing. His beloved has not been captured by a rakshas. And how the pea hen comes up to him, if Sita was here, she too would have come up to me. What role is Lakshmanji playing you? Here, Ram is describing all this to Lakshmana through these words. But in general, in general, see, even now we will see, Siram will sink further and further into despair. And it is Lakshmana who pulls him out of that. Yes, Siram's character is the ideal and yes, he's very strong. But even he needs support and help at that time and which is what Lakshmana gives him. This is probably the weakest point for Sri Ram in the entire story, right? Sita's loss shook him like nothing else. Yes, what has spoken about his mind in this face? We will see now as well as with Sugriv. He sinks into grief many times, but he always comes out of it. And I think that's also learning. Last time we spoke about how Sita came back from her lows. This time we will see that Sita, Sita, Sita, and Sita's Hanuman. So, yes, it is natural for us to be emotional at times, to get overwhelmed. But the lesson of the Ram mind is that we can always come back and overcome and channel our emotions into purposeful action. Right before we started rolling, you were telling me something as a bit of a personal recap on the first two episodes. Would you like to repeat what you told me? I was watching some of the viewer reactions and comments and I think they were happy with the change we made in the second episode. So, it's good that we were able to do that. I was also thinking that we would love to hear on some of the substantive points of our discussion as well. How it affects the viewers in their own lives. I've had some comments like this, there was some person, a youngster who was preparing for his PG need exam. And he found some of the inspirational parts of the Ram mind, something that he wanted to listen to every day in order to support his or aid his preparation. Right? So, what role does it play in our day-to-day lives in guiding us, in inspiring us, would love to hear more about that. What do you think? Yeah, I think you're nudging the audience, you have to drop a comment with some kind of positive feedback as well. In terms of what have they liked about this series, what else would they like covered now in the fourth episode. But our intention here is to one document the story and two kind of present the story in the new light to the younger generations. Like yesterday's episode myself, we were talking about Raman and Sagar's Ramayan, which was from the 1980s. And then B.R. Chopra's M.A.B.A.R.R. from the 1990s. We also talked about the anime of the Ramayan. And those are the visual reference points for my generation especially. And I will also say for your generation. Yes, extremely popular. Yes. So, we are hoping that this series becomes a bit of a reference point for the new generation. That's okay. Any final inputs to the audience before we move forward in the story? Thank you for joining us. Okay. Let's move forward, Bensa. Essentially Ram said, now that she's not here. She Ram was also worried sick for Sita. How would she bear this ordeal of captivity? And he told Lakshman that Sita always stood by me. Even when I was sent into exile with nothing, she supported me. And even in exile, when I felt low, she would cheer me up with her pleasant words and beautiful smile. She Ram is again reminded and he said, why they hear, what came at all? Karashro, Sharm, el-Xmana, el-Xmana. When will I hear, Sita streetwise once again? I cannot live without her. If I don't see her, my life is meaningless. But if I can be with her, I will not wish for anything else in the world, not even Ayodhya. Speryayayayayayayayayayayayayayayayayayayayayayayayaya Assessment of the Kishkinda Khan by the banks of Pampa is a very long one. And Walmi-Kis telling us again and again about Shiram's longing for Sita. I think it's absolutely clear, Marshivwalmiki is telling us, let there be no doubt about how dearly Shiram loved Sita. But his longing was turning into despair and you'd asked before what was Lakshman's role. He came in right here. He told Ram, pull yourself up, this is not who you are. You cannot grieve like this. We have to focus on doing. I will find Ravan. We will get Sita back and this is what pulled Ram out of his, you know, despair. And the two came towards Rishamuk Mountain looking for Sugriv. And now we shall meet Sugriv, the Vanaras and the greatest among them, Shrihannumal. Is anything sad about the Vanaras before this point? Any kind of description, because I'm assuming that when Vanas reading the story, a description would help one visualize the Vanaras before they actually appear. Right in the beginning, in the Balakan there is a reference. When Vanariki gives us the context and he has some references about the Vanaras, that all the Vanaras were, you know, spread throughout the land in the mountains and the forests and so on. So he has given us some references in the Balakan, the first book of the Raman. But really, if you were acting it out, right, if you were doing a stage performance of the Raman, then this is where the Vanaras come in. Okay, so Sugriv and Hanuman are watching Raman Lakshman come towards Rishamuk. They watch from a distance and Sugriv is suspicious because they are dressed like aesthetics, but they're carrying arms. He tells Hanuman, they may have been sent by my brother, Wali, go and speak to them and find out why they are here and go in your natural human form. Prakrati naiva gatva and so Hanuman took off his monkey attire and went dressed as an ascetic, Kapirupam Parithya jyajya bhikshuru pam tatobhejay. Let's pause it a little bit here. Yes. Because this is, I'm sure you have the question, what is this monkey attire? Yes. I mean, I think it's spoken about it in our first ever interaction before this series, I'd love for you to repeat this part. Okay, sure. And we had a fairly long conversation. There were many individual slokers and verses I had quoted. Because, because I think the visual reference point from all Indians who have heard the Raman is that Hanumanji was some kind of a divine ape like being. That's what you always end up visualizing. Right. Him with that very peculiar ape like mouth. But you're saying that in the actual Valkmiki Ramayan, it is actually a reference to Atayo when they're speaking about ape like appearance. So perhaps there is a mouthpiece, there is a tail. So let me recap, you know, or summarize the discussion, the longer discussion we had earlier, essentially the one era's were forest dwellers who dressed up like monkeys, humans who dressed up like monkeys. They were not a different race and they also had the same cultural roots as the people who lived in the cities and jump paths. Now, I will, you know, break down each of these parts for you. The word, one are in Hindi means bhunder, right. And so, why not monkey? The words say so. And Valkmiki has also used the word kapi, hari, la vangama, shakham, regahah, all of these are used to denote monkeys. However, all of these are adjectives. So, la vangama, although used to denote a monkey actually means those who leap. So, even humans who leap can be called la vangama. And interestingly, Valkmiki has also used the words, nari, jhana, sthri and purush for the walanaras. He has also called them oneavasinha, kana nukasa, oneavukasa, all of which means forest dwelling people. So, on one hand, he has called them nari, jhana sthri, purush, humans, on the other hand, one ra, la vangama, essentially they were humans who dressed up like monkeys. Even today, forest dwellers, we see sometimes put on feathers or horns to dress up like some chosen animal. Because you have given so much of your own time, energy and life to the Ramayana, I would love to ask you a little tangential question. When I say Hanumanji to you, also grief, what are you visualizing when it comes to the face? A forest dweller who puts on some type of a face mask to look like a monkey. Similar to like I said, some forest dwellers would put on feathers or other accessories, something that they could take off. Because even now, Sugri was telling him, take off the monkey attire, kapi rupam paritaja. So, it is something that they could take off. And also, you know, lot of stories related to the tail. So, they also wore a tail. Gotcha. And specifically, when it comes to Hanumanji, I am pretty sure that visually, there would be something very different about him as compared to the other banners. In some level, it could just be his human face would have had a bit more cage, like cage's radiance, that's the translation. One more question too, yes, surely they were there and not Shri Valmiki. What are you visualizing when it comes to Hanumanji's face? So, definitely, he was the greatest of them all. He was well-watched in the way that Shastras and there's something very special about him. And we will see what he does in the Krskindha Khan and Sundar Khan. But in terms of powers, let's say, or he is like the one that has but the greatest among them. So, you asked me, visually, if you see, even if you go to ancient temples, for example, and you look at sculptures, Hanumanwali, Sugri, other banners are all shown similarly. So, you can't make out from just their size of proportion. Also, interestingly, in some of the temples, their size and proportion is the same as the size and proportion of Shri Ram and Lakshman. So, perhaps even those cultures were indicating that these are humans who dressed up like monkeys. Gotcha. Another example, we spoke about this. There were one, whereas who were born to Rishis. And some specific examples have been given. Marishiputra, Mahri, Thram, Arthish, Mantam, Maha, Kapim. So, Arthishman was the son of Rishim, Marishi, and he was a oneer. So, they became oneer as. It was a lifestyle that they chose. Really not a different species, right? I mean, you are saying that they were born to Rishis, some of the people of Ayodhya were born to Rishis, and Ravan as well, his father was a Rishis. So, there is no racial difference and definitely not a different species. And then, finally, also that their cultural roots were not different, because Bhagavan was also an expert on the Vedas and Shastras and so on. So, Sugri tells, go and speak to them and find out. Hanuman comes up to them and asks them who they are. Lakshman says, we come as friends. He tells Hanuman the background and says, we are looking for Sita and we have been told that Sugri will be able to help us find her. Hanuman says, I am delighted to meet you, because Sugri also needs help. His brother has thrown him out of the kingdom and forcibly taken his wife. I will take you to meet him. When they go to meet Sugri, Hanuman introduces them and says, they come as friends. Sugri says, I am honored by a proposal and then Ram and Sugri solemnize their alliance or bond of friendship by doing a production around fire, Agni. Sugri tells Ram, my brother has thrown me out of the kingdom and taken my wife, forcibly taken my wife. Ram says, Valiniam tam vadishami tawabhari a pahari nam. I will kill this valley who has abducted your wife. Very important words. We will see later that when Ram kills Valini, there are many questions. Even today people have this in mind. Why did he kill? Did he do the right thing? Right now he has stated the intention. He has said, I will kill Valini for what he has done to your wife. Sugri said, I have also heard from Hanuman that you are looking for Sita. Don't worry, I will find her for you. We will get her back. In fact, the other day, I saw a rakshas going away with the lady and she was screaming, O Ram, O Lakshman and she dropped some ornaments. I have kept them with me. I will show them to you and you can check if they are hers. You remember when Raman was going away with Sita, Sita wanted to drop some clues for Raman Lakshman and she dropped some of her ornaments in a piece of her clothing, Utherya, near the Vanras and these were the Vanras. Sugri had kept these ornaments and gave them to Sridhar. They were wrapped in Sita's Utherya. Sridhar opened the cloth and inside Vasita's ornaments. He clutched them to his heart, fell down to his knees. His eyes clouded with tears and his throat choked and he told Lakshman, Look, Sita's jewelry. But Lakshman said, I cannot recognize some of this jewelry. Lakshman's answer is legendary. Very famous, shown in many sculptures and paintings. He says, I cannot recognize some of this jewelry. I will tell you what that answer, what he says after this, but before that the context, when they were going for exile, in Darshad's court, Lakshman's mother, Sumitra had told him, Raman Darshadathan with the mom with the Jhanakatma Jam, Ayodhya, Matavim with the Gatchatatha, Yathasu Kam, treat Ram as your father. Treat Sita as your mother. The forest is now Ayodhya for you, go forth my child, be well. And Lakshman had done that for all these years in exile. He had served Ram and Sita like a father and mother. He had given up 14 years of his life to support them. And then on the day that Sita had got kidnapped, you would remember the harsh and unfewards that she had said to him, in a fit of anger, admittedly. But she had said, you have an eye on me, don't you? And you have desired me all this while, what a thing to say to Lakshman. After all these years, now with that context, you will be able to appreciate Lakshman's answer. He says, I cannot recognize some of this jewellery. I cannot recognize these arm bands. I also cannot recognize these earrings. But I do recognize these inklets for I have always bowed at her feet. Sri Ram was sinking further into grief once again upon seeing Sita's jewellery. This time, Sugriev pulled him out. He gave him courage. Then Sri Ram asked him, what happened between you and Vali? He loved others. And then Sugriev told his backstory. Sugriev and Vali were brothers. Vali was the elder one. When their father, the king of the one was passed away. Vali inherited the kingdom. He was the elder one, capable and popular. And Sugriev was happy to serve under him. But then there was a misunderstanding between the two. And Vali thought that Sugriev had tried to kill him and assert the kingdom. And so he threw him out and forcibly took Ruma. Sugriev's wife. Sugriev said, please help me. But he also said, Vali is extremely powerful. How will you be able to face him? Luxement smiled. And he said, what can Ram do to convince you? Sugriev looked around and pointed to a row of seven trees. They were all in the line. And he said, if Ram can fire an arrow at any of these and with just one arrow, split the tree, then I'll be convinced that he can take one Vali. Sugriev took an arrow, loaded it on his bow, pulled the bow string hard, and shot the arrow with such force that it split not one, but all seven saw trees, one after the other. Sugriev was stunned and convinced. And so all of them set off for Kishkinda, the capital of the Vannaras. Sugriev went to the gates of the capital. The others stood hidden behind the trees in the forest. Sugriev challenged Vali, taunted him to come out and fight with him. Vali came out, boiling with fury, and the two started fighting. They were throwing punches and kicks at each other. Sugriev was powerful, but slowly Vali began to get the upper hand. Sugriev looked for Ram to help, but Ram didn't do anything. And then Sugriev lost his nerve. He ran back to Rishimu. When the others came, Sugriev was embarrassed. And he told Ram, why didn't you help me? I thought we had a plan. I would draw Vali out and then you would kill him. Why did you get me beaten up like this? Ram said, you to look exactly like each other. I did not know which one was Vali. And so I could not shoot my arrow. Listen, let's do this again. This time you wear something around your neck. Why don't you wear that creeper, the gajapushpi creeper with flowers, so that I know it's you. Sugriev did that and they went back to Rishimu. Once again, the others were hiding in the forest. Sugriev taunted Vali to come out. Vali was about to come out, but Vali's wife, Tara, stopped him. She said, this is very suspicious. Sugriev came, challenged you, got beaten up, ran away, and now he's back. Surely there's somebody helping him. And I have heard from Aspai's that that someone is Ram, the prince of Ayodhya. He is invincible. Don't go against him. And I also think you should bring Sugriev back. He has done nothing wrong. Please appoint him as your successor. But Vali did not listen to Tara and he came out of the city to fight Sugriev. Once again, the two started fighting, throwing, you know, landing blows on each other. Once again, Vali began to get the upper hand. Sugriev looked around, waiting for Sugriev on to help. And this time, Sugriev had no doubt which one is Vali. He took an arrow, loaded it on his bow, pulled the bowstring hard and sent off that arrow, which went to whizzing like thunder and struck Vali on the chest, and Vali crashed to the ground. When they came up to him, Vali was dying. But he still asked Ram these biting questions. He said, how could you? I was fighting my brother. I was not fighting you. I have not harmed you. I have not insulted you. I have no fight with your kingdom. Then why did you kill me? I thought that you followed Dharma and Satya. But you are a fraud. You know, these were very strong accusations at Shiram. And Shiram told Vali, I will tell you why I killed you. Your crime is what you have done to your younger brother's wife. A man is not allowed to have a physical relationship with his daughter, sister and younger brother's wife. A younger brother is like a son and his wife a daughter-in-law by forcibly taking Ruma. While Sugriev is still alive, you have violated Dharma. And Shiram told him how the punishment for this crime was also seen in earlier instances. Shiram also said, the Iqshwaku's ensure that Dharma is not broken throughout the world. Parath is asking. And as his representative in these lands, I cannot allow a crime like this to go unpunished. Essentially, Shiram was saying that Vali was a criminal and he had punished him for his crime. And then Vali said, Yatomat, tatatava, Nasam shayaha. Without a doubt, what you say is correct. He realized that what Shiram had done was as per Dharma. Tarah soon came out. She cried bitterly upon seeing her husband in that condition on the verge of death. But even then, she did not blame Rama. She said, you have got the fruits of your actions of throwing out your brother and forcibly taking Ruma. So clearly, whether it was Vali himself or Tarah or Angad, none of them thought that Shiram had done anything wrong by giving Vali the punishment for that crime. Context on Angad? Angad is Vali's son. He too came out with Tarah. He will play an important role going ahead. Young boy, in fact, on his just as he is dying, Vali, after he says I am convinced, he tells Ram, Angad is still a young boy. Please take care of him. And then they conducted the last rites of Vali. Sugri was feeling very guilty for the role that he had played in his father's death. He started talking of killing himself or retiring and going back to to Rishamuk. But Lakshman is always very direct. He came up to him and said, ma, who, Vali Shabudhiri? He said, don't be silly. You are the king now. And so Sugri became the king of the Vanaras. How many years have they already spent in the Vanvas at this point? 13. So they are in there last year. All this is happening in the last year. In fact, when Sita saw the golden deer at that moment, just before she got abducted, she had already started thinking about what they would do when they go back to Ayodhya. So it seemed like that Vanvas was almost over when Sita was kidnapped and then Ravan gave her 12 months. Remember, he said, I give you 12 months, except my hand or else. Yeah. Gotcha. So now they had to look for Sita. However, they couldn't start on it right away. Ravan said to Sugri, the rainy season is almost here. Chaturmas, it is impossible to travel during this season. The rivers are all in spade, overflowing with water. You can't cross them. And so we will start the search as soon as the sky is cleared. So Sugri goes back to Kishkinda. Sri Ram and Lakshman settled down in a cave on Prasavan Geary to wait out the rainy months. And then the rain clouds roll in. Marjivalmiki had earlier described Wasanthrathu, spring and now he describes Varsharathu, the rainy season. So in this description of the Varsharathu, the rainy season, I want to show you one verse, one sloke. Let's see how much is packed into one sloke, 32 syllables. Also the context is roughly 12,000 BC. Yes. According to Naileshoak's housework. Yes. No, let's go ahead. This rays stores it in its womb for nine months and then delivers the water back. This life giving water, Rasaianam. What beautiful imagery for the rainy season. Even here you can see the summer months, the land is hot dry, parched and dusty. And after the rains, there's new life, new birth. So a wonderful imagery of storing the water in the womb for nine months and then delivering the water back, the Rasaian life giving water. Also note here that Marjivalmiki has described the water cycle. You would remember this diagram from your school, right? The sun's rays strike the ocean and then water evaporates, stores in the clouds and the clouds deliver the rainfall. And this is what he has described. How many of these kind of paragraphs are there throughout the Walmiki text? So you mean about the rainfall? I mean about just these little scientific anecdotes. Yes. And see, he's not describing water cycle here. He's actually just describing rainfall in a very poetic way. But we can see it's the water cycle and it's many times these are the hidden for example, there is another description where you can infer that he knows that the earth is round and not flat. All these thousands of years back. Does he say that? No, but you can infer if he has to do that imagery, then they must have been knowledge that the earth is round. So such are the descriptions of the rainy season. But again, firstly, Ram, there is no joy in all he worries for Sita and then the four months passed by. Nothing is said about Sita word this point, her reality. In the Kishkinda Khan, not much. So Sita Ram is coming and you know, he has come to meet Sugriv and now he has formed an alliance with him. We will meet Sita Mai in the Sundar Khan when Hanuman goes there. Okay. Once the skies are cleared, there is still no sign of Sugriv because he is busy. He is busy having a good time. He's partying day and night with many women in his palace. We are on the way to the front of the world. We are on the way to the front of the world. And Ram's patience is running out. He tells Lakshman, these four months have been like 100 years for me. Sita is in that terrible condition and we are wasting time here. I think my friend Sugriv has forgotten what he has promised to do. Go and remind him. Lakshman goes to meet Sugriv. But he is lying drunk out of his senses, knocked out. His people wake him up with great difficulty. He has red eyes and he's not very coherent. He tells Tara to go and calm Lakshman, calm him down a little bit and get him inside. Lakshman then comes in and he tells Sugriv, you are having a good time here, aren't you? You got what you wanted from Ram and now you are not bothered to do what you promised to do. But don't forget what he's capable of. Sugriv then jumped down from his throne and he said please forgive me. I am always at Ram's service. I can never forget what he has done for me. And then Sugriv sprang into action. He gave orders for the Varnaras from all lands, from mountains and forests in different parts of this land to all gather in Kishkinda. And then Walmikhi describes that millions of Varnaras came to Kishkinda from the windows, from the western seacoast and all the way to Himalayas. So sometimes we wonder where the Varnaras were only in southern India or the region of Hamphi, not so. They were present in all the forests and the mountains. And following Sugriv's command they came to Kishkinda and then Sugriv gave them orders to go and look for Sita in the four directions. So he made four teams, one for each direction north, south, east and west. And here Walmikhi takes a very interesting term. To each team he tells them what they will find as they go further and further in that direction. And essentially in these Sargas, Masivalmikhi has described what must perhaps be the oldest world Atlas? Probably the most interesting part of our episode in Nileshoksa as well. Like he has studied this in great detail, the locations. Give you a visualization of the earth from 12,000 BC. Yes. I have to recap one aspect of one of the episode with Nileshoksa. You were speaking about the east direction in this part of our episode. I think he also described the Pacific Ocean beyond Japan. He said that I think called it the Great Ocean or something along those lines. And he said that at the edge of the Great Ocean you will find a mountain with a threshold drawn on it. And that exact mountain is still there. You can still see a threshold drawn on it. And what Nileshoksa said is that he went to South America. And if you actually ask the local tribes in that region about that mountain with the threshold, they say that they don't know where it came from. But their ancestors have passed on the message that this threshold has always been there. That's what I find crazy. Yes. Effectively the Ramayan from back then was describing a part of South America and the threshold still existed. And they've also spoken in detail about South America. But this is a part of the Nileshok episode. So I recommend viewers. Go check that one out after you're done with this particular episode. But from this part of the Walmiki Ramayan, for me at least so many tiny excerpts like this, give you a very, very detailed and very, very mind bending visualization of what the earth and what world culture was back then. Yes. I'll give you some examples. You know, sometimes for some of the references, we can match to today's locations easily. Sometimes it is more difficult. You can approximate, you know, you have reasonable confidence. For example, he talks of Yavadripa, which is the island of Java. Yavad is Java, Vipa Island. Further in the Eastern direction, we are somewhere in Southeast Asia, he talks of a river called Shona. Shona means red. And he says that the waters of this river are fast flowing and reddish in color. Rakta jalam shi grahavahinam. This is most likely the red river which passes through Hanoi in Vietnam. Even today it is reddish brown in color and it floods very often. Further east, he talks of some people who inhabit islands and Mershi Walmikhi says through Sugri's words that the people are yellow skinned pleasant looking people who eat raw fish. Sounds familiar? Japan? Yes. Most likely. So, Sugri gives orders to all these four teams. But the A team is for the Southern direction, because that's why most likely Sita is. Remember, Jata you had seen them going south. Sugri had also seen Ravan going for the south. So, Angad is leading the team and Jambavan and Hanuman are also in that team. Sugri pulled Hanuman aside and he said, if there's one person who can do this, it's you. I'm counting on you. And Shira gave Hanuman his ring, which had his name inscribed on it. And said, when you meet Sita, show this to her. She'll know that you come as a friend. And then the four teams set out, roaring with confidence. They went out, but within one month, by the way, Sugri had given this time limit. You must come back in a month. Within a month, the northeast and west teams came back. They had found no sign of Sita. The south team was in trouble. They had lost their way for some time. And not only had they not found Sita, but they had also not covered the area that they were supposed to look. So, they were in trouble. They were somewhere on the eastern sea coast, sitting around, detected. And show what to do next. Just then they came across some pathi. Jha-tai used elder brother. And he told them that he has seen Sita in Lanka. And he told them the way to get there. Once again, energized, they came south to the point from which they had to cross over the ocean. But when they looked at it, the vast expanse, you know, all the way to the horizon and much beyond. This is what they had to cross, how to go across. The distance was 100 eugeneers. How much is a eugeneer now in terms of today, you know, the conversion factor is not yet, not exactly known because this conversion has actually changed over time. But just so that you can get a sense for this distance, a eugeneer was 12 eugeneers long. And now we are talking of 100 eugeneers. So, it was a very long distance. The Vanda-ras were looking at the sea and they were stumped how to go across. Anghad, who was the leader asked them, who can go across? No one spoke up. He said, bhuadwam, yasayya shakti haplavani, speak up, who can go how far? And then somebody said, I can go for t eugeneers. Somebody said 50. And then 60, 70, 80. Jambavan said, I can do 90 eugeneers and no more. Anghad said, I can do 100 eugeneers, but I'm not sure I can come back. In all this, Anuman was sitting quietly. Jambavan asked him, tushmi meekan tamaashtitya, hanuman kimnejalpasy. Why don't you say something, Anuman? Why are you sitting by yourself? Anuman could do it, but Jambavan needed to inspire him and remind him of who he was. Let's watch a short video on Jambavan's inspiring words and how Anuman rises up to the challenge. Would you like to sit in context on Jambavan? Jambavan was an elderly senior forest dweller. Interestingly, he did not dress up as a banner. So he was a rickshaw. These were forest dwellers who dressed up like bears. Mmm, watch. And that culture still exists in Russia. Right, bear, a culture that they also dress up. I see. Okay, we'll move on to the video. Yes, once when you were just a little boy, you thought that the rising sun was some fruit. You jumped up to try and grab it. And what a leap it was. But unfortunately, you fell and broke your jaw, hanoo. And thus your name, Hanuman. And that day, despite your injury, you never even flinched. You were so brave that Indra blessed you. You will only die when you wish to, not otherwise. So what are you afraid of? This one, Rami, is waiting to see your valor. Otish taharishar dulah, lungayas wa Maharana wa mam. Arai is the greatest of one of us. Go forth across the ocean. And then Hanuman began to rise. He realized once again who he was, for he was capable of. The Varnaras roared and cheered him. They praised him. And that praise gave him even more confidence. He began to glow radiantly. He stretched and readied himself like a lion stretching his body. Hanuman's voice was reflecting his growing confidence and determination. Walmiki Poetikali says, it seemed as though he was physically growing bigger. And then Hanuman tundered, I am the son of Vayu. I am powerful and unstoppable like him. I will push back the sea waters with my arms. I will strike the ocean with my legs. Bhuhwagapranunnaena, Urujanghavi again. I see clearly. I shall soon meet Sita. I can go to Lanka without a doubt. Hanuman was bursting with confidence. Kiawalmiki has shown us the power of narrative, how our beliefs about who we are, our self image, can critically impact what we do. The Varnaras were amazed and delighted to see Hanuman fired up like this. Jambawan said, by the blessings of the Rishis and the elders, may you be successful. Hanuman then took a few steps and launched himself towards Lanka. Walmiki Poetikali says that when he leapt, so great was the impact that the trees shook violently. Rocks came tumbling down the mountainsides, streams of water cushed out, birds flew away, and the deer and elephants ran about terrified. And Hanuman had brought the entire focus of his mind on only one thing, getting to Lanka. Jagama, Lanka, Manasa, Manasvi. And with those words, the fourth book of the Walmiki Ramayana comes to an end. Kishkinda, Khandam, Sampurnam. Action movie. Yes. Wow. And with that leap, he has set off towards Lanka and now begins the fifth book of the Ramayana and the Sundarana. Goosebumps. Because perhaps this is one of the most impactful stories from the world of Sanatana that's impacted every kid who's ever heard the Ramayana. Because it is yourself confidence. Yes. I have one question before we move forward. Because I remember reading the Ram-Charitramana's version of the Kishkinda-Karn. And even the Rasa-Gee Maraj, Sundar-Karn that you have available on YouTube and Spotify and all these streaming sites. Always speaks about the fierce love that Hanumanji felt for Shiram. Is that mentioned up to this point? Or is it a love that developed as they went into battle together and as they got to know each other more deeply? Clearly that developed over time. Right. So their first meeting was when he had gone down to meet them. When Sugri was sent him, that was their first meeting and even then Shiram was also very impressed. In fact, as they were coming up, he said to Lakshman, anyone who has an ambassador like that is a very fortunate king. He was very impressed with Hanuman. And remember, he gave his ring to Hanuman because he also thought out of everyone if there's anyone who can do this, it is Shri Hanuman. And likewise, Hanuman's respect for Shiram and later on, we'll see towards Sita as well when he meets her grows as their interactions develop. Yeah. I want to say something slightly mind-bending. I genuinely believe in L.A. Shoxo's work. And if he's dating the Ramayan to about 12,000 BC, I also hosted Rupa Bhati on the show who studied the Rigvait and she takes that timeline back to 200,000 BC two lakh years ago. For me, Sanatana seems very, very incomplete without Hanumanji. But the truth is, if these timelines are to be believed, we've only had Hanumanji as one of our key deities for the last 14,000 years or so. I have so many tangential questions about Hanuman. So the question I have for you, so is we were just speaking about whether or not you're going to do the same kind of research with the Mabharath. But you said that, I don't know. I'm too deeply immersed in the Ramayan right now. I'm still understanding it. You're still studying it. Is your understanding of Hanumanji also evolving as you're moving forward? Like all aspects of the Ramayan, we spoke about this earlier as well. The more you studied, the deeper you go and the more inspiring and the more inspiring you find it. So Shri Hanuman's character as well. Yes, there are the grand moments which we appreciate and are inspired in the first reading. For example, crossing over to Lanka, which we will see now, nobody else could do it and Shri Hanuman did it. Very inspiring. We'll soon see that. But also the way he speaks to Sita in that fragile condition later on, his thoughtfulness in every moment is something that you appreciate as you study it more and more. Yeah, in any version of the Ramayan, even the animated Japanese one, you know, when you read like the Ramjerethamanas, the moment Hanumanji appears in the text, the energy of your own mind changes. Like as we are speaking right now, the energy of the room is so different and he's with us in every episode. But when you're specifically speaking about him, there's a very different calming energy almost in the room. Shri Hanuman has a very special place in our hearts. And also think about it, we are, you know, reading Ramasayayana, Ramayana, Ram's journey, Ram's story. And now in Sundar Khan, we are going to Lanka without Shri Ram, the main character is Shri Hanuman. Yeah. One last thing before we move on Rajasindan Disa, who's one of my absolute all-time favorite Tantra guests on the show, he said that when it comes to Sanatana, any deity with the face of an animal, that's Ganpati, Hanumanji, nursing, Varahahah or Varahi, any deity with the face of an animal is more easily accessible through their mantras, the closer to earthly realms and they come to help you much quicker, always felt like Ramanji as well. That's what they say, right? When you're saying anything about Ramayana, when you're reciting the Ramayana, he's present in the room. So that's all I have to say while moving forward. One tiny question for you, do you feel a difference in the energy when Valmiki is writing about Hanumanji? I find that whenever I'm reading the Sundar Khan, it is my favorite one. But likewise whenever I'm reading the Ayodhya Khan, it is my favorite one. All of these kinds are special in their own way. How do you feel when you're reading the Sundar Khan? Sundar Khan is about inspiring. You know, never give up. Even in your darkest moments, you can draw inspiration that there is a way to come out of it. Jai Hanuman. Let's move forward. So with that, he has just taken a leap to go across the 100 yoga janas to Lanka. Now, what is the image that usually comes to your mind when we talk about Hanuman going to Lanka? Flying over the ocean. Flying over the ocean. We've seen that in so many, you know, paintings, temple walls. Water flying in both directions. Yes. Some demons trying to and absolutely dominating those demons. Right. So we have just seen, he also said, I will push back the sea waters with my arms. I will strike the ocean with my legs at the end of Kishkinda Khan. He said that. So what was it? Of flying, leaping, or swimming? The first saga of the Sundar Khan is the longest one of the Ramad. And in this saga, Hanuman goes to Lanka. And Mashiwalmiki has described this journey in great detail and his words are clear that Hanuman swam to Lanka. He describes his swimming technique in greater detail. So it was very similar to what we now call the butterfly stroke. Hanuman would throw both his arms out into the air, push back the water. He would also kick with his legs. And he would put his head down into the water, come out and open his mouth to breathe. So that was the swimming technique. I want to show you some specific verses which talk about this. Hanuman would throw both his hands out into the air. It seemed as though a pair of five headed snakes had emerged from a mountain. Pibanyi Bababhu Chapi, Swurmijalam Maharanavam, Pipasa Rivatcha Kasham, Dudrushay, Samaha Kapih. It seemed as though the great one wanted to drink the entire ocean. And then he looked up to the sky as though he was still thirsty. In simple words, he would put his head into the water and then come out, look up and open his mouth. Is there anything that said about his increase in size? Yes. So even earlier at the end of Kishkinda Khan, there is a talk of him increasing in size. Now the question is, is that real or is that poetic? During the journey also, Marjivalmijik talks about him increasing in size to overcome a particular challenge. Now if you say that this is real, perhaps he had some powers to increase his size. For one particular challenge, he actually increased his size up to 100 eugenists. Now if it was real, would he need to fly or swim? He could have stepped across. Clearly this is poetic. Increasing in size is increasing in determination and confidence. And reducing in size is about doing things nimbly with a lot of flexibility. In stealth. Now together with this swimming technique, the beauty of Walmik is poetry is such we know he went swimming. But the image left in our mind is of Hanuman flying through the sky. And the reason that happens is, at the end of Kishkinda Khan, you saw that when Hanuman took a leap, this huge exaggeration that the mountains shook and rocks tumbled down, etc. Walmik says that the force of his leap was such that because of that there was a strong wind. And the wind carried the flowers onto the sea. And then the sea, which was covered with flowers, looked like the star-ee sky. There is also a slok on this. Tarah chitam eva kasham, Prabhabhau samaha rah daha. And then the great ocean looked like the star-ee sky. So with this transition, he now starts looking at the sea as though it is the sky. So when Hanuman went in and out of the water, he talks of him, Hanuman is like the moon that is going in and out of clouds. So there is vivid description of Hanuman in the sky after this transition. And some people wonder whether this was due to any yogic pause. Now, Marshi Walmikhi has not mentioned any yogic pause. Also, some people ask whether there was any personal flight technology, the way the way Ra-Wan had Vimans. But once again, in Marshi Walmikhi's description, it starts with the actual description of the swimming technique and then the transition. And then the descriptions of flight. And this was a grueling test. See, other winners could also do what Hanuman was doing. They couldn't do it for 100 eugenics. So they could do it for 40, 50 or up to 80 eugenics. But only Hanuman could do it. He faced many challenges, but in the end, he did reach the other shore and he had achieved the impossible. What are the challenges that I spoke about? One of the challenges is that Hanuman is challenged by Surasa, a serpent. Essentially, Hanuman was drawn into a whirlpool into the sea and he tried to swim out, but the currents were too strong. And finally, he had to go through the eye of the whirlpool. Essentially, Surasa, the serpent said that, I have a boon and you must go through my mouth. And so Hanuman reduced himself in size and went through Surasa's mouth or the mouth of the whirlpool. He was also attacked by a rakshashi called Sivhika. That part of the ocean, even today, has what we call the salt water crocodile. It is a huge beast at the top of the food chain, so an apex predator and therefore the right name, Sivhika. And Hanuman was able to overcome her as well. Wow. Do you think that Ravan's Lanka is the same as Sri Lanka? Yes, that's your conclusion. That's my conclusion. And I know that, for example, Nileshok has a different conclusion and I respect and admire his work. Essentially, see though, research related to this, you collect all the data points that are there in the Ramayan and then you have to figure out the best fit many times because they could be conflicting data points. You're an engineer. So, you know that when you collect data points, you draw a line of best fit, right? Every point may not fall on that line, but what is it that best describes it? And then sometimes you have to decide what do you put more weightage on? So, for example, if you put more weightage on the sea levels at the time of the Ramayan, then that points in a slightly different direction. But if you look at it from this point with that Hanuman went swimming, which is described in great detail. So, it couldn't have been a thousand kilometers or something more. And even today, you can see the island of Lanka and you can see the islands, the Ram say to that go up to it and so on. So, I think, you know, for me, the conclusion, I have taken, you know, in these videos as well as in my analysis that today's Sri Lanka is the Lanka of Ramayan. So, 100 eogeners would be the the distance between Kanyakumari and Sri Lanka. Not Kanyakumari, from Ramishwaram, you go to the edge Dhannushkodi from there to Sri Lanka. Ramishwaram is your starting point. Ramishwaram is a little inland. If you go right up to the tip, it is Dhannushkodi today. Sea levels would have changed a little bit in all of these. So, it could be a slightly different at that time. So, not at the southern tip, it is a little north and east, which is the closest point to Sri Lanka. Gotcha. Okay. Understood. So, Hanuman made it to the other side. He then walked inland and came to the city of Lanka. It was a spectacular site built on a mountain. The city seemed to be touching the sky at the base. It was surrounded by a moat and a boundary wall. Even the boundary wall was inlaid with gold. It was an incredibly well-built city. It exuded power, grandeur and wealth. And there were many rock shasas protecting and guarding the boundary wall and the gates. Hanuman decided to wait for nightfall and then when it was dark, he slipped over the boundary wall and went inside. Valkmiki has given a detailed description of Lanka at night. The city was well laid out like Ayodhya with broad avenues. It had mentioned seven and eight stories high, sub-the Bhumashtah Bhumastya and the mansions were also decorated with gold, silver, crystals. The city dazzled in the moonlight. Truly, it was Soneki Lanka, city of gold. And what Hanuman saw breaks a lot of stereotypes also, or misconceptions about the rock shasas. I want to share some of these with you. Right in the beginning, when I had spoken in our first discussion, I mentioned rock shasas and you said, are they demons? And I said, hold on. Let's hear what Marshi Walmiki has said. Because if you say demons, it gives a particular imagery. Even today, if you ask someone, a child to draw a rock shas, he may draw it with horns or hideous looking creatures. Walmiki says, the rock shasasas of Lanka were Virupan, Surupan, Bahuru Pan, Samwahidias. Others were very handsome. They came in all forms. Some were very nice clothes. And the rock shasas were not at different trees. Another misconception, I want to clarify. The rock shasas were not at different trees. Even Ravan's father was a Rishi. He was not at Raksas. His mother was a Raksasi and he considered himself as part of the Raksas community, the Raksas clan. Earlier also Tataka, Virad, they were not born as Raksasas. So this is nothing to do with race. Also, the Raksasas, the Raksas society, also its roots were Vedic. So they were not, the cultural roots were the same as those of Ayodhya and the other cities and the Varnaras. And the Varnaras, yes. At its core, right? In Lanka, Hanuman heard people reciting the Vedas. He saw Vedic altars and shrines. He saw images of Lakshmi. And on many Raksas houses, he also saw the Swastik symbol, the ancient symbol of auspiciousness. Rakshogana, Grouhei, Ishwahi, Padmas, Swastikha, Samsthithahi. So clearly, fight with the Raksasas was not a fight between one race and another. It was not a fight between Vedic and non-Vedic societies. This becomes very clear when we hear about the Raksas, about Lanka's description, through Hanuman's eyes. Hanuman looked for Sita in different parts of the city. And then finally, he came to the highest point of the city, where he found a grand palace. This was clearly Travan's palace. It was a complex of buildings once again protected by a boundary wall. Hanuman slipped across the boundary wall and went inside. It had some open areas and also some halls in a halls. What Hanuman saw in the outer courtyards is very interesting. He saw horses and elephants. And some of the elephants had two and three tusks, some had four tusks. V\u0101r\u0101n\u0101\u1e63\u1e6dh\u0101toora\u1e47a t\u0101y\u012by\u012b. Now, this is a very interesting clue from a dating point of view, because the four tastelefant got extinct thousands of years back. So, this clearly points towards the 12,000 mark rather than the 500 or 1000 V.C. Markal, the four tastelefant. And in the courtyards, Hanuman also saw many vehicles, chariots as well as V\u012bman's. So, the flying vehicles, V\u012bman's, R\u0101wan had not only one, the push-pok V\u012bman was the greatest of them all, but he had many of them and they were parked like a parking lot in his palace complex. Hanuman went into the inner chambers. There were many banquet halls where he saw wines built on the floor, different kinds of meats, half-eaten plates. And then finally, he came to R\u0101wan's bed chamber. It was a massive hall dedicated to the pleasures of the senses. There were hundreds of women lying around. They had all dosed off after much drinking. Pleasure. Pleasure hall. Same as the bedroom. Yes. What is described? So, these women, their hair was disabled, some of their clothes that partially slipped off. They'd obviously been drinking a lot. They had been playing musical instruments. So, singing, dancing. And in the middle of it, all was R\u0101wan's magnificent bed. He was also sleeping. And even on his bed, he had company. They were beautiful ladies, sleeping on his bed. And Walmiki says, you know, who were these women? So, Walmiki says that many of them had been captured as poils of war by R\u0101wan after battles. So, clearly when he abducted Sita, this was not the first time he had done any such thing. In fact, he was very proud of it. He had told Sita as well. I have captured all these women from different lands, Itastha from here and there. And you will be the chief among them. That's what he was offering Sita. So, many of them had been captured. Walmiki says, some of them had come of their own will as well. Tiny pause. I'm very curious about what R\u0101k\u1e63a society was in the first place. These spoke word, V\u0101n\u0101\u1e47\u1e63, we said that they are basically forest dwellers. And it's likely that they were putting on Gio that made them eventually look like monkeys. Similarly, do you think that the R\u0101k\u1e63as were a clan? And they were, the capital was Lanka. Yes. So, the R\u0101k\u1e63as community, the king was R\u0101wan. Their capital was Lanka. They had another power center at Janasthan, which R\u0101m had destroyed last time near Panchavati. Near Panchavati. Yes. Just remember, Kura. Kura ran his 14,000 R\u0101k\u1e63as as that R\u0101m kill. Mumbai of Bhakthan. You know, he was close to Mumbai. And when we're speaking about the battles that R\u0101wan went about, this is, what do you think? Is it all over the globe? Most likely what we are talking about is in the vicinity of this land between the Himalayas and the sea. Subcontinent. Yes. And a few islands around that as well. Okay. Gotcha. Now, let's move forward. And you were talking of the R\u0101k\u1e63as society. So, picture is it like this. Even when Hanuman came in, see, when he, by now, the women had all dosed off, right? But when he came into the city, it was just after Dak. The party was on. There was music and laughter everywhere. This was clearly a very wealthy city, well organised. And the R\u0101k\u1e63as were having a good time. You know, in the section about Sugriv, you spoke about how post-beating Valley, he was in a bit of a party phase for three months. Yes. And he also speaking about a party phase. Is alcohol mentioned in both the? Good definitely. Very clearly. Repeatedly. Same kind of alcohol? Most likely not. Because the V\u0101nara's had alcohol made of honey, which was the forest produce. And here, most likely, it would have been some sort of a fermented fruit. Fruit wine. So, alcohol and partying are mentioned and really in R\u0101van's bedroom, there is some kind of mentions about sexuality. A lot had been going on. In fact, when Hanuman sees all this in R\u0101van's bed chamber, he comes to the conclusion that the Sita R\u0101m had told him about cannot be in a place like this. And he says, I must look for her elsewhere. And he comes out of the bed chamber. But before we leave here, one interesting point, Walmiki has described R\u0101van sleeping form. And here, clearly, he talks of one head and two arms, not 10 head and 20 arms. Hanuman came out and looked through the rest of the palace everywhere in the basement rooms on terraces. And when he did not find Sita, he started going into a loop of negativity. He started imagining one bad thing after another. He said, he thought to himself, has R\u0101van killed Sita. Or perhaps she has killed herself. If I go back and report this, how will R\u0101m be able to survive? He cannot live without Sita. And then what about Laksman? So, he is getting paralyzed with these thoughts. And he thinks that he has reached the end of the road. He even considers taking his own life. But then he reminds himself, Vin\u0101shay, Bhavodoshaha, G-1, Prabhnothibhadrakam, killing oneself, is not correct. Only if one is alive, will things take a turn for the better. I must focus on doing. And he pulls himself out of that negative loop. And when he thinks about everything where he has gone, he realizes that there is one place he has not yet looked. Which is the world garden near R\u0101van's palace. And so he goes over the boundary wall of the garden and goes inside. It's a beautiful garden, true to its name, a shokha. That which takes away all sorrow. He goes around looking for Sita. Hanuman climbs up a tree. And then in the distance, he sees a lady wearing old and dirty clothes. She is covered with dust. She is pale, emansiated. She is obviously not being eating well. And she is surrounded by R\u0101kshisis and she looks scared. But even in that condition, there is something special about her. Hanuman thinks, is this Sita. And then he realizes that the clothes she is wearing, although they are old, they match the cloth in which the jewels had been wrapped. And also she looks like the lady that had dropped those jewels. He had finally found Sita. Hanuman shed tears of joy. But he was also pained on seeing the great princes in that condition. Ashoka Manika Madhya, Shokasa Agarama Plutam, India Shok garden, which takes away all sorrow. Sita was drowning in Shok grief. Sita's condition, this has been about 10 months in captivity. In many popular productions, perhaps this does not come through fully. What all she has endured, tortured, torment, trying to get her to say yes. And she is lying there, covered with dust. But still holding on to her faith in Shri Ram. Is anything sad about the torture? Well, she keeps saying that R\u0101kshisis, torment her. Remember, R\u0101van had told that R\u0101kshisis guarding her, break her will, like she is like a wild elephant. So, torment her and then be nice to her. Use both approaches. Hanuman is waiting for a chance to speak with Sita and then the sun comes up. And Soun R\u0101van shows up. And with him, ask them of the ladies that had given him company the previous night. Sita sees R\u0101van coming and she starts shaking with fear. She hugs her knees. R\u0101van comes up to her. His eyes full of passion and he looks at her, his gaze lingering on every part of her body. Sita wants to make herself invisible, but there is no getting away from R\u0101van's gaze. R\u0101van then says, The creator must have taken retirement after he made you. You are so beautiful. There is no one as beautiful as you. O Sita, why don't you accept me? I am hopelessly in love with you. Be mine and I will lay down the world at your feet. You will be the queen of Lanka. Why do you still think of R\u0101van? There is no way he can get you out of here. Sita is answer. In spite of everything that she has gone, in spite of the fact that she is shaking with fear, she is firm in her answer. She places a blade of grass between herself and R\u0101van. And addressing the blade, she gives the answer. R\u0101van is not even going to get a look from her. She says, Stop thinking of me and let me go. I am inseparable from R\u0101van, like light from the sun. Apologize to Ram. I am telling you what's good for you. If you don't let me go, Ram will surely find me and he will kill you. Now that's not the answer. R\u0101van wanted to hear. So things start to escalate from here. Once again, let's see a short video on this. If you are so strong and brave, why did you have to take Ram and Lakshman away from the hut in Panchavati? Why did you not fight them? You cannot face them. Just as a dog cannot stand up to two tigers. Shakkam, Sundar, Shana is Thatum. Shuna, Shardhu, the Yoriva. R\u0101van replied menacingly, I am being nice to you and you are insulting me. You ought to be put to death right now. But I am holding back my anger because I am in love with you. You have made me be afraid. I am not sure. I am not afraid. As per the deadline I had fixed before. You have two moments. Oh, pretty one. Climb into my bed. Or else, I will send you off to the kitchen to be chopped up and cook for my breakfast. See Tha fired back. You wretch. How come your tongue that says such things does not fall out of your mouth? Your end is certain. Thaam will come and his arrows will knock the life out of you. You don't stand a chance against him. He is powerful like an elephant and you are a rabbit. This was See Tha's incredible power. Months of torment and suffering could not break her. No temptation could lure her. Thaavana could not break her will nor shake her confidence in ram. Thaavana, his eyes rolling with anger, kissed. See Tha, I will destroy you and he raised his right fist to punch Sita, mush them with them madak chalam, maitilim, hantumarabdha. But our actions he quickly came forward to diffuse the situation. She embraced Ravan and said, fire you after that wretched Sita, come with me. Let's have some fun and she drew him away. Ravan went back to his palace, laughing heartily with his many women and leaving behind a trembling Sita. Pravaipa Manan, thermaparama was Thitham, trembling but steadfast on the path of Thaavana. Hithi, her, asa, that is how it happened. Intense. Yes, you do think he was a cannibal? The Raksasas ate human flesh. In fact, the Raksasi surrounding Sita also threatened her very clearly. We are going to cut you up. They brought some axes and so we'll cut your body up right now and chop you up into pieces and they were discussing who will eat which part and that they should divide the parts equally and so on. Any other mentions of cannibalism throughout the text? About Raksasas, yes, many times. Wow. So, Ravan had gone back and the Raksasis got back to the work that he had given them. They started trying to convince her or torment her, threaten her. But Sita's answer remained the same. She said, I will never accept Ravan. I will not even touch him with my foot. Why doesn't he get it? My answer is no. Sita's answer and her faith in Sri Ram is incredible. See, she doesn't know whether he even knows that she is here and so, although she has clearly said that she will not accept Ravan, she does swing between hope and despair as to whether Ravan will come to save her or not. She is very confident that if he knew he would surely come but does he even know I am here? And then Sita starts to lose hope. She thinks that Ravan will definitely kill her because she will never accept him. So, in two moments her end is certain. So, she thought of taking her own life and ended now itself. She thought of hanging herself from her own long braid. So, she clutched the braid, went a little distance away from the Raksasis, caught hold of a branch to tie her braid. But just then there was a wave of hope and she turned away and that hope was not misplaced because this was the tree on which Hanuman was sitting and this was his chance. He could speak to her but what could he say that would not frighten her? She was in a very fragile emotional state and if he said something she might shriek or run away and that would alert the Raksasis. So, what could he say? What Hanuman did really shows off his presence of mind and intelligence? He started speaking in an indirect way. So, he is sitting on the tree, Sita is looking away and he starts to say there was once a great king in the Ikswaku dynasty called Tashrath. His eldest son was Ram and he starts narrating the story. Sita is listening to it and he narrates it up to the point of a abduction. Sita knows this very well and then Hanuman continues. He says, Ram and Lakshman came south looking for Sita, they made an alliance with Sugrive who is the king of the Vanaras and now Sugrive has sent off thousands of Vanaras to look for Sita. I am one of them. I crossed the great ocean and I came here and now I see in front of me a lady who looks exactly like the Sita. Ram had told me about and then Hanuman stops. Think about it. Sita has just heard that thousands of people are looking for her. First of all Ram and Lakshman are okay and that thousands of people are looking for her and one of them is right there on the tree. She looks up and through the leaves of Anar looks back at her and this is too much. She just fades. Vansita regained her consciousness and one climbed down from the tree and approached her and he asked her, Oli-di, Aya-Sita and now Sita's answer is once again it tells us a lot about Sita. There's also learning for us. Sita says, I am the daughter-in-law of the great King Tashrath, the foremost among all the kings in the world. I am the daughter of King Janak. My name is Sita. I am Ram's wife. No, she is giving her introduction, her identity as the daughter-in-law of the great King Tashrath. It all started with what her father-in-law Tashrath had done, those promises and all her troubles started from there but she holds nothing against him. She knew that he was trapped by his own own words. Also, the day Ram Lakshmana and Sita left. Dashrath's last few days were not his best. He was a broken old man but Sita remembers him for his best days. I am the daughter-in-law of the great King Dashrath, the foremost among all the kings in the world. Hanuman was delighted to hear this. He said, I am Hanuman, Ram's messenger. Sita was so happy to see him but she had a doubt. And she said, if you have met Ram, can you describe him for me? And this is the place where Hanuman describes Sridam. Physically, you had asked me in our first conversation, is there any physical description of Sridam? So yes, there is one right at the beginning in the Balakan and then here through Hanuman's words. And then Hanuman gives Sita the ring that Ram had given him and now Sita has no doubt. A wave of happiness swept over Sita. She held the ring and she felt Ram's presence. And finally she had someone, she could call her own. She opened her heart out to Hanuman. They spoke for a long time and then it was time for Hanuman to leave. Sita told him, please tell Ram, I cannot take this much longer. If he doesn't get here in two months, it will be all over for me. Sita also gave Hanuman an ornament as proof that he had met her. And she also told him about an incident that happened in Chitra Kutt as further proof because this incident no one knew about it except Ram and Sita. Hanuman then asked her if she had any message for Lakshman. Now remember what she had last said to Lakshman, those hurtful and unfair words. This time as message she says, please convey my regards to Lakshman. He is a quiet one, but he is always there for Sita. He gave up everything to support him in exile. Pithruad Vartatay Ramy, Matruan mom Samacharath. He treats Ram like a father and he treats me like a mother. I'm sure he will come to my aid now and then Hanuman took his leave. He had achieved what he had come out to do, but now he realized that a war with the Rakshasas was inevitable. And I thought that he should assess the strengths and weaknesses of the Rakshasas before heading back. And he should also try and weaken the enemy as much as possible. I'm sorry Sam, I'm going to have to stop you there for a little bit. I want to know why I didn't see them just go away with Hanumanji after the interaction. Okay, in fact, Hanuman asks her, why don't you come with me? And Sita gives multiple answers. Sita gives many reasons. She says, you have the strength and energy to go across the ocean and I do not. And if we try to run away, the Rakshasas will surely see us. And then how will you fight them while also carrying me on the back? Sita also felt that Ravan had tricked Rama away from the cottage and kidnapped her. And now Rama should defeat Ravan for what he had done and she didn't want to run away like this. And finally, Sita still recoiled from the memory of Ravan's touch the day she had been kidnapped. You remember how Marjivalmika described that he had grabbed her by the hair, dragged her, picked her up. And she said, I still recoil from that memory and I don't want to touch any person other than Rama. But clearly the practical reason was she didn't have the energy to do go across the 100 years and as like Hanuman. So Hanuman thought I have found Sita but I must now weaken the enemy and I also must assess their strengths and weaknesses. Is there anything written about his emotional state of mind because what you're relaying, it seems more practical and almost for lack of a better as geopolitical here. We see many different aspects of Sita and Hanuman's thoughts. So he was at the lowest point in Ravan's palace when he didn't find Sita. He thought he had looked everywhere and he had not found her and when he found Sita, he was overjoyed. So those were emotional aspects but as soon as the job that part was done, he started thinking practically towards the next steps which was the war. Gotcha. All the characters of the Raman, we find that they are thinking and planning for the future. Sita dropped the onaments even when she had just been kidnapped but immediately she started thinking what else can I do to leave some clues. Hanuman has just completed what nobody else could do. He had found Sita but now he's thinking of the war. And so Hanuman did something that was sure to end the rage Ravan. He destroyed the Ashokwan. He uprooted trees, broke down branches, breached the pawns and when Ravan heard about this, he sent some of his ferocious warriors to tackle Hanuman to deal with him. The Rakshasas attacked Hanuman and soon they were all dead. Hanuman fought with whatever he had, crowbars, rocks and so on. Ravan sent another group and again another group every time the result was the same, the Rakshasas lay dead and finally Ravan sent his son Meghanad, also known as Indrajit for he had defeated Indra. Indra and Hanuman fought ferociously until finally Indrajit used his brahmasra and trapped and snared Hanuman. Then tied him up with ropes and victoriously dragged him back to the court. In the court one of Rakshas' generals, one of the Rakshas' generals asked him, who are you? Why are you here? Hanuman looked at Ravan and said, oh king of the Rakshasas, I wanted an audience with you and to get your attention I destroyed the Ashokwan. Your people attacked me and I killed them in self-defense. And then Hanuman continued, I am Rama's envoy ambassador. Rama was staying in the Dandak forest together with his wife, Sita and Prada Lakshman and one day Sita went missing. She said, Hanuman does not start aggressively with Ravan. He starts off in a mild manner. He says, Sita went missing. Rama has formed an alliance with Sugriv, the king of the Vanaras. Thousands of Vanaras are looking for her. I am one of them. I came here and saw her in your garden. Now you know very well that keeping Sita here is not right. Let her go. And then Hanuman's don't change. He spoke more forcefully. He said, remember what happened in Janasthan? You know the entire Rakshas force was wiped out by Ram. He said, remember what happened there? Don't let the same happen here. There has never been nor will ever be anyone who can defeat Ram. Let Sita go. Don't die the news of death around your neck. Ravan exploded in anger. He ordered, kill him. But his younger brother, Vibhishan stepped in and he reminded Ravan that an envoy and a ambassador can never be killed. He said, of course, what this Vanar has done should not go unpunished. But you can give him some other punishment. Ravan then thought about it and he had a wicked idea. He said, Kapinang kill along Gulam, Ishtam Bhavativushanam. This tale that the Vanar's were as an ornament is very dear to them. See once again he's calling it an ornament something that they could take off. But he said it's very dear to them. So set fire to this Vanar's tale and take him around the city. This turned back on Ravan very badly and we'll see this as well in a video. Now fed with dry wood. The Raksasas started pulling at his binds to parade him through the city. At first, Hanuman resisted. But then he thought, I have seen Lanka at night. Now I must see the city during the day. And so as the Raksas has marched him through the streets and squares of the capital, Hanuman went happily along. By the way, if you are still not sure where the Hanuman's tale was real or something that he put on, consider this. First, Ravan clearly calls it an ornament, Bhushanam. And second, when Hanuman's tale was set alight, he was physically not heard. But yes, he was wild with rage as he considered this a great insult. Crowds gathered and watched the spectacle with glee. Hanuman also watched, making careful observations. Some Raksashe went and told Sita that the Vanar she had spoken to was being taken through the streets with his tale on fire. Sita's heart sank and she prayed for Hanuman to come through the safely. When Hanuman reached the gates of the city, he saw his chance. There was not much of a crowd there. He deftly freed himself from the bonds, made a surprise attack on his captors. And within moments, finished them off. Now he stood there alone. At the gates of Lanka, his tale burning. And he thought, what else can I do that will strike at the hearts of these Raksasas? Hanuman had noticed earlier that the fire at the end of his tale was not reaching his body. The other end of his tale was not hot at all. It was like a fire torch. And he thought, I shall use this torch to set fire to Lanka. By now, Hanuman knew the layout of the city very well. He headed for the quarters that had the mansions of the senior most Raksasas. He went from one building to the next, setting each one ablaze with his tale. And finally, he went into Ravan's palace complex and set it on fire too. A breeze was blowing and the fire spread across the city. The flames leapt up and molten gold flowed down from the walls. The palatial structures crackled in the blaze and tumbled to the ground. Hanuman roared. Raksasas ran around the shelter, trying to save their wealth and their lives. He looked at Hanuman and wondered fearfully. Is he really a winner or is he a mirage, the Lord of Death? By now, the whole city was on fire. The giant place was radiant like a million suns. It was like the fire of dissolution, the end of time. And soon, Hanuman had reduced the city of Lanka to ashes. Hanuman, Lanka put on Brother Thumb. Beaty, her, are so. That is how it happened. So, big blow to their actresses. Military, theeem, diplomat. Yes. You don't view him that way until you read the Walmikina. You kind of visualize an ape-like divine being using a tale to burn the whole city. Yes, yes. Even here, notice which parts of the city did he go through? The houses of the senior most structures, these are the leaders. Let's try fear in their hearts. Hanuman's strength and power is well known. But a lot of these things bring out is also his intelligence, his diplomacy, war strategy, and also his singular focus on getting things done. I think his message is never give up. That's what comes through in the Sundar Khan. After this, Hanuman put out the fire on his tail. And as he looked at the small drink ruins of Lanka, he was struck by a fear. What about Sita? What if she was injured or worse in this fire? He rushed back to the Ashokwan, thankfully, Sita was safe. And then he came back to the shore. And then used the same technique that he had used earlier to go across the ocean. Nothing's edible, Raubin's reaction? No, not ads, or to the lung burning of Lanka? No. Surely it was a big shock to him. You know, this journey across the ocean earlier as well, we spoke how there is the practical description of swimming, but also the image of him flying across the sky. If he could indeed fly, or there was some technology for flight, think about this, would he not fly straight away from a Sita kwan to Kishkinda? Why walk up to the shore? Go across the ocean and then walk further. So he swam back. The Vanara was waiting for him. He went up to Angad and Jambavan and said, Drushta Devi, I met Sita. The Vanara's erupted in joy. This was mission accomplished. And then they all, by the way, when Hanuman was describing what all happened back in Lanka, it's interesting that when he spoke about Sita, he turned towards Lanka and bowed down respectfully. His meeting with Sita had created a deep impression on him. You were asking me earlier, how did the respect and the bond develop over time? He had been hugely impressed by how Sita was dealing with that terrible condition. And then they all came back, started on their way back towards Kishkinda. On the way, they came to a forest, which was very attractive and enticing for them. See, these were troops that had been out on the road for many months. They were exhausted and hungry. And in this forest, they had plenty of food and wine. This was Madhuan. This was a special grove that belonged to Sugriva, the king's one. And the troops wanted to drink the wine. So they asked Angad for permission and he consulted Jambavan and told them to go for it. So, Jogriva is speaking, this is between Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Between the Swadir Rameshwaram in Tamil Nadu and Hampin Karnataka, somewhere in the middle, close to Hampi by now. So they went in and started drinking and eating. Again, Walmiki has described it very interestingly. Guyantiketshe, Prasantiketshe, Nritantiketshe, some were singing, others were laughing, some were dancing. They fought with each other, they abused one another, pushed each other, jumped up and down from rocks. And as usually happens after much drinking, they created a nuisance too. So they started destroying the Madhuan, you know, breaking trees, breaking pots. And the keeper of Madhuan was one person called the Dymuk. The Dymuk first tried to convince them to stop. He scolded them, but instead of listening to him, they beat him up and all his guards too. And they drank some more. The Dymuk thought that these guys, their days are numbered. You know, he will go and report this back to Sugriv and tell him what is going on. And he will surely pronounce the death sentence on them. The Dymuk rushes back to Kishkinda. Sugriv is with Raman Lakshman. He goes and reports what has happened. But to his utter shock, Sugriv says, I am delighted to hear that. I pardon them. Go and get them quickly. See, Sugriv had sent out four teams. The North, East and West teams had come back in a month. And they had not found Sita. And the South team was late. And now the first thing he hears is that they are destroying the kings forest and drinking Sugriv knew his people well. So he knew what the celebrations meant. He turned to Raman Lakshman and said the words that they had been waiting to hear. Drishta Devi, Nasandheha, without a doubt, they have found Sita. What is Nwan'tel as this story? Soon, Nganan Hanuman and the others reached Kishkinda. Hanuman came up to Ram and said, Sita is safe. See, even in these small dialogues or actions, Hanuman's intelligence and thinking comes through. The first thing he had said to the one that was when he came was, I met Sita. But he knew what is the question. And she rams mine. Is she okay? And so the first thing he said was, Sita is safe. Of course, Sita wanted to hear it all. He asked, where is she? How is she? Tell me everything. What did she say? Hanuman then gave the ornament that Sita had given for Sita. It was an ornament that she had worn on the day of their marriage. And once again, Ram was overcome with emotion. He said, Sita had looked so beautiful then. And now I have this ornament, but she's not with me. What else did she say? And then Hanuman told the story that Sita had told him, which no one else knew. He said, Inchitra Kud, once Sita was resting in your arms, you were both asleep. A crow suddenly attacked Sita, repeatedly attacked her on the chest. And when you woke up, you found that Sita was injured and the crow had blood on its claws. Sita says, You could not even tolerate that crow's mine offense against me. You had tried to kill the crow. In the end, you just injured it and let it go. But you could not tolerate that. Then why are you not saving me now? You are the greatest warrior in the world. If I mean anything to you, you will slay Ravan and destroy these rakshasas. That was Sita's message. Just the message that would fire up Sita. And Sita had also told Hanuman that she could not hold on much longer. Hanuman had said, Take courage. Before long, you shall hear the roar of one of us. Krip from Trakshashi Raghavam, Lakshmanam-cha, Lanka-dwaram-upagatam. Before long, you shall see Ram and Lakshman at the gates of Lanka. And with those words, the fifth book of the Ramayan, Sundar Khan, comes to an end. Sundar Khan-dharam, Sampuram. Ithi-hasa, Ithi-hi-hi-hasa. That is how it happened. Self-confidence would be the overarching theme. Believe in yourself. On all else, Masita's level, Shri Ram's level. Hanumanji level, obviously. Yes. I think that's what the energy of this whole podcast was. Yes. And for me, it was dedicated to the Vayana Rasating right next to you. Yes. As is this room. So, thank you. That's the end of episode three as well, looking forward to the grand finale. Thank you. And in the next episode, we will go back across the ocean. And, you know, you may have heard the story of floating rocks, but in the Walmikirama and that is not how it happens. In fact, Sita also asks this question to Hanuman. When he says, we will all soon be back, but she says, but how will you cross the ocean? And at that time, Hanuman just says, oh, don't worry about it. You know, if I could do it, the others can too. But we'll see what happens on the crossing of the ocean next time. More to uncover. Yes. Thank you, sir. That was the episode for today. Ladies and gentlemen, that was part three of our four part series, the finale releases in two days time. I hope that this reaches every single Indian because this retelling of Walmikirama is the only accurate story of the Ramayana that may or may not already be known by you over the course of your life. This series has been made with an intention to reach every single Indian so that we move at the house or real Indian history forward through time. If you wish to experience an even more detailed version of this retelling, do visit Yeshua Deep Source YouTube channel. It's called 21 notes. It contains all the detailed episodes of the Ramayana. And if you're someone who enjoys the podcast form of this story, then wait for another couple of days for the series finale. If you haven't watched the first two episodes, I highly recommend you go check them out. They give you a very accurate version of that time period in India's history, which is supposedly said to be roughly around 14,000 years ago. Lots to learn from the set diocese and I hope that it reaches every single Indian. Lots of love to you. Lots of love to you. Should be so. And until next time guys, I see you now."}