{"Episode Name": "REAL Magic & Occult Studies | British Tantra | Peter Grey on TRS", "Podcast Name": "Beer Biceps - The Ranveer Show", "Episode Link": "https://the-ranveer-show.simplecast.com/episodes/real-magic-occult-studies-british-tantra-peter-grey-on-trs-zwo_XpEf", "text": " We degree, I've been looking for this conversation, perhaps my whole life. What is magic? Are we talking about something that is similar to what is shown in the Harry Potter films? Um, Western Magic, we have a series of spirits to accomplish the magic that I want to accomplish. Well, would you say that what you are doing is white magic? You know, I have had encounters with spirits, which... Damn, okay, okay. Wow. Being a Western practitioner, you feel there are parallels with Indian Dandra as well? What we have in Europe is a broken tradition, and we've taken from Indian traditions, Kalimah and Hanuman and Garnish. These are global now. Almost all the magicians, only Garnish, that you're in the floor and small acts of Garnish pooja. Are you drawn to a particular Western deity? My personal work is very much with God as Babylon, powerful, but a negative telling of the female divine. Are you comfortable talking about a blood sacrifice? Yeah, I've engaged in flesh suspensions like you hang from metal books for the God as I often have practitioners making an offering of the fluids or of their own blood. Is this what? People call witchcraft. Is this the story that is the most powerful place in England? Hanj is troubled place. It's been pretty broken up. I am of the belief that Jesus Christ was definitely a sage, but I'm also convinced that his original teachings are slightly altered. Yeah, a lot of what we think of Christianity is better thought of as the work of simple. Really, yeah. A dime at Christianity to go over Europe? I am sure there were extremist Christians back then as well. It was an extreme religion. The Christians deliberately destroyed. The gods who were in the statues by smashing the noses of the statues and often carving crosses them them as well. Just feeling very blessed to be in your presence. I've really played to the divine because someone like you into the world of Duran Beethshoe. I feel I've not even tapped into 5% of everything you've seen in the early early. We recorded this podcast towards the end of 2024 and I promise you that this is one of the most mind-bending guests to have entered the realms of the Duran Beethshoe. You'll know why I'm saying that after you complete the two episodes that we recorded with him. The second one is very, very dark, but in order to understand the second one better, you need to understand the first one which is centered around European magic and the world of the occult. The world of so-called paganism that existed in the geographical land that we know as Europe before Christianity entered Europe. It's got its own history, it's got its own lore. I can very loosely compare this to the world of Harry Potter to some degree. You'll see some parallels. But this is a very perspective building conversation because these kind of topics are not spoken about openly on the global internet. I'm glad to be changing that through this podcast. Trust me your info something with these two episodes. I cannot wait to record with Peter Gray again and you'll know why I'm saying that after you complete both the spectacular conversations with the legendary Peter Gray on TRS. Peter Gray, this is one of those episodes that have been excited about since the beginning of the Renvi Shoe's UK tour. You're one of the focal points of my tour honestly. So thank you for being on the show. No, my pleasure I'm there, it's really great to do this with you. Yeah, I am extremely surprised to know that you have watched our Tandra episodes. So that's just crazy to me. It's very important for me to understand who I'm talking to and making sure that we're on the same level and to see your serious engagement with these spiritual traditions is the reason that I agree to do the podcast. I'd asked you how you'd introduce yourself to someone who's meeting you for the first time and you used the term occultist. Yeah, you said that I'd say that I am an occultist. I'd love for you to explain that further. Certainly, occult meaning hidden occultism and to be an occultist is to be interested in the rejected knowledge, the parts of human experience which are often pushed into the darkness non-examined. So it means that I'm interested in the hidden capacities within people, the hidden signatures within the world around us. So occultist is a fairly good description of what I do. Okay, hidden knowledge, hidden. Okay, you feel there are parallels with Indian Tandra as well? I think there are significant parallels within the intention given that the tradition that we're part of has been fed into by the knowledge of the Indian subcontinent. So when you look at Western magic and you look at Western occultism, the impact of the time when the English Empire controlled India means that we gained a huge amount of material from India. The traditions that I'm involved with have explicitly drawn from Tantra from Calatantra traditions and have fed them into our own understanding of what we do in the West. Wow. Okay. I can't believe you said Calatantra. It's callatantra in the... But I can't believe you said that. So praise you know that word. We very often find that practitioners in the West will even describe themselves as naths. Like this is something that has been part of our tradition since the translation of the Indian texts came to England and it's fed into our magic because we're a very syncretic approach to things. Okay. Can I kind of break away by just saying I'm glad to be speaking with you? No, that's quite as well. Yeah. Like genuinely very excited about what we're going to learn today. But let's dive in once again. I'm going to give you a bit of the Indian perspective on Tantra based on what I've learned through the show. And my explanation of these things is limited because of the nature of the English language. And English has its own purpose. And the English language helps you understand things logically and in a practical manner. But there's certain Sanskrit words which is our ancient Indian language that can't be translated easily. Yeah. So if I am having a conversation with an Indian Tantra expert, sometimes they tend to get a little bit upset with me for using like these kind of definitions. But I'm going to speak for the sake of the Western audience here as well. So basically in Indian Tantra, it's primarily based on Yantras which are objects or symbols and mantras which are chance. But maybe a Western equivalent to understand a chant better would be a spell. And when I use the word spell in front of an Indian Tantra expert, they tend to get a little bit upset. They said, no, no, it's not a spell. It's much more powerful than just a spell. Now each mantra is related to a deity, one of our gods. And it definitely has a certain purpose. Like in the in Harry Potter, they have expectopetronum for a certain thing. So we have mantras for purposes in the same manner. What we truly believe in India is that Hinduism should be called Hinduism, it should be called Sanatana dharma, which loosely translates to the eternal faith. And what I've learned through the show is that elements of Sanatana dharma, parallels a present in African culture in the form of voodoo, in Indonesian and Southeast Asian culture in the form of animism and in the West in the form of what you're involved in. Would you like to see anything be somewhat of a silly so. You'll find that Western magicians still very often use Indian mantra, particularly if they have a meditation practice. So for a meditation practice, the use of mantra and breath is something which is seen as a fundamental skill. And obviously for an Indian tantric, what we do might look quite basic. We would define spells slightly differently. So I wouldn't describe mantra in the terms of spell. How would you describe mandra? The use in chanting a mantra in Western magick practice would be to do with thought stopping with stealing the mind, with running the energy orbit through the system. So we'd be using mantra in those ways. So very often we've taken that from an Indian approach. Whereas if we were to use a word like a like spell, for example, a spell would be more describing a constructed ritual with a. A spoken element with a performative element. Not necessarily with the antra, but with a combination of items or objects which are assembled at a particular time, in a particular circumstances and are empowered through that. So we have a lot of similarities, but we also have quite a few differences. Aside from the Indian use of mantra, a lot of people have also taken our tradition back to a period in history of syncretism, which we can see as. as Greco Egyptian. So really, so this period we've been drawing a lot, one of the most important magical texts which has been used by us as a series of texts called the Greco magical papiry. And these are these are a collection of texts and techniques, which contain barbarous words. Long strings of syllables and the chanting the recitation of these words are used to put the practitioner into an altered state of consciousness. So we're using them in that way. You just explain mantra and English in a very accurate way. I think any Indian tantric would be sitting in front of you. Would say, yeah, that's a much more accurate description than just using the word a spell. Thank you. That's great. So anything's to break down you. I definitely love to ask you more about magic because it's a word that you mention a lot. What is magic? Okay, so the most common definition of magic that we use in the West is one taken from a magician called Alistair Crowley, who's perhaps our most famous magician in the Western tradition. And he defined magic as the science and art of causing change in consciousness in relation to the will. So it's focused on creating change with the will. Now this was a Victorian definition. This is definition which has changed. So this idea of consciousness changing is continued. He talks about the will. He's talking about it in a very technical, specific way. So when Crowley talks about the will, he's talking about one coming into alignment with one's guardian angel, which we could consider as a stellar diamond. So when you're born and your horoscope is cast and set, there is a particular spirit that set over you and your job as a magician is to come into alignment with the teachings of that and to become the person you're meant to be. So you're meant to fulfill yourself in this fashion. Is this the equivalent of a D.D.? It's not quite the equivalent of a D.D. like an angel. And you're just best to think about it like an angel. A higher being. A higher being. That is meant for you and your job is to get in sync with that. Yes. And this is the case for every human being. Yes. And you can see this through your astrological job. Yeah. Wow. Okay. Please go on. So the definition of the science of causing change, consciousness according to the will, this has been, this has been challenged in the last probably 50 years in that we've moved to a more animistic understanding in the West. So it's easy to hear his definition and think that he's talking in a purely psychological manner. What's happened in the last 50 years in Western magic is that we've shifted from a psychological model more to a spirit model and an understanding that the world is peopled with spirits. And so the work that we're engaged with is more of a spirit work and that we're aware that spirits are the actors, the movers who fulfill what it is that the magician desires. Have you seen the film Aladdin? He has a genie in it. Sure. Which kind of is parallel with what you're seeing. Right. A higher being. That can be helpful. When I use the word helpful, what does that make you feel? The idea of a spirit helper is something that's been common in the Western tradition since, you know, at least ancient Greece. So the idea of a spirit helper is is is particularly about what you all often find with the Western magician is that they have a series of spirits with whom they work and whom they task to accomplish the magic that they want to accomplish. Well, okay, I have a lot of Muslim friends of mine who have had these conversations with Islam also has an element of a particular prayers. They also have a parallel practice where they will have their own genes. Yeah. Now, genes can also be evil, but there are some genes that are helpful as well. Yeah. Similar to what you're saying. Absolutely the same. Same thing. Same thing. It's a very good parallel. Okay. I again, I'm trying to understand your world a little bit better, but I'll give you kind of an explanation from what I've learned from Rajashi and the and all the tantra. Guess we've had on the show. What Sanatana and Hinduism says about Tantra is that hey, the end goal is human evolution, which is very far away. So if you get into practice, it's going to take you lifetime. So you're going to be reborn and you're going to have to continue your practice from where you left off, but the end goal is to become one with divinity. Okay. What the West calls God. Yeah. Now, in order to get to that process, you need to utilize mantras and yantras, which will help you evolve up till that point. And that is supposed to be the goal for anyone who's born in a Hindu family. Most Hindus don't know about this because people have not understood the essence of Tantra. But they say that towards the journey to that goal when you're using the mantras and the yantras, what ends up happening is that you are blessed with for lack of better words, superpowers like, these your mind keeps evolving. And in our faith, it's said that these are just distractions to test you the universe. Test you. They say that oh, here's the ability to have a heightened intuition. Here's the ability to have a calm mind. Here's the ability to bend reality. You snap your fingers and they might be a flame coming out of your hand at a very high level. But these are all distractions to test you against your desire for the divine. Do you still want the divine? Do you still want to reach God? If you do, great. If you don't and you get caught up in the arrogance of the superpowers of the Siddhis, you're going to fall. It's a great way of looking at it is like the game snakes and ladders. So as you keep playing at certain points in your evolution, you'll see a ladder. That's great for you. If you've been very disciplined and faithful with your practice. But then at certain points over the course of your own spiritual journey or your life, you're going to be tested. And if you fail those tests, if you become arrogant, if you stop practicing, if you harm other people because karma plays a huge role in this whole process. So if you have bad intention with this process and you become very powerful, you use it negatively. That's like touching a snake on that snakes and ladders game and then you go down the board. You go down the spiral. This is a fair understanding of what I have gained from doing countless tantra episodes. But what would you like to say anything about what I've just said? I think it's a completely understandable perspective. We are not chasing Siddhis, particularly in Western magic. Although we are having some of the experiences that you would you would recognize as Siddhis occurring within practitioners. Magic in the West has gone through various stages. So there was a period when there was a lot of thought about this evolution towards Godhead, particularly using the model of the of the Kabbalah, the Jewish system. Whether it's a tree of ten spheres and one moves through the spheres upwards towards Godhead. And as you move towards Godhead, you go through different challenges and there are different cities that occur on that process. And that was very much, it was very much the idea of a spiritual evolution of the practitioner. A lot of the focus in Western magic has changed to looking at the specifics of practice rather than looking at the specifics of a spiritual development. So you will find that Western practitioners will present a whole range of approaches to this. Some will say, not not using this term, not not not using the Indian terms, but they will say this is about the cities and they're interested in the cities and it's very easy to see individuals who become trapped in chasing those things like there are problems with that. But I think people have become somewhat reticent about talking about spiritual development, which is somewhat of a dirty word. There's been so much, there's been such a shift to talk about the practices and the rituals that there's less focus on the goal. And me personally, I think that's a mistake. I think we are engaged in a process of human evolution. I think you find that the best of Western magicians are interested in human flourishing. They're interested in us evolving. They're interested in us becoming the next iteration of humanity. And those ideas that you spoke of of evolution through lifetimes. Personally, I'm interested in more of the lightning path. I'm here to do my work and then I will go. Whereas you will find other people in the Western tradition who have taken on the ideas of reincarnation and want and seeing themselves working through a chain of lives. But those ideas of reincarnation which were very, very, very popular in the Indian influence, kind of like Victorian period of magic. They're less popular. They've shifted more into the new age. Simply because a lot of the people who talk about past lives tend to be quite deluded individuals. They tend not to be particularly serious individuals. They tend to think, you know, I was clear-patcher or I was Napoleon or, you know, and there's a sense of grandiosity that comes in with that. But I think anyone who's engaged in these practices will have had some past life experiences. But I think all of us, all of us are looking at love, life, liberty, light as the, as what I work is aimed at. So the nucleus of your practice as well as your mind as an occultist is, hey, stay in the moment. Do your best as a practitioner. Because that's how you move forward in the snakes and ladders game. Are you moving forward to a particular point? No, necessarily. It's just about the practice. This is a very healthy version of Tantra. This is what I've had a lot of my spiritual mentors tell me as well that just be concerned with doing your best with your discipline, your sad, no. Yeah. Many more questions for you. This is something very interesting that you said because I'll tell you what, your English. And I feel a certain connection with English people because I've grown up watching a lot of football and cricket and I understand your culture very deeply. Coming to the UK was a life dream of mine. Now the thing is in India and I hope this takes nothing away from a human connection on any level because I look at this as two souls speaking with each other. So I say this with a lot of caution. But when you're growing up in India, there's a lot of resentment towards like the British Empire from back in the day. Not even going to get into that conversation. But we're constantly spoken about everything that went on in India. I've never heard a British person speak about the flip side of the British Empire where Britain and Europe in general rediscovered certain things about oriented philosophy from India and it traveled back to the West. I found that so fascinating. So could we like rewind a little bit in history? And again, this is not a conversation about colonialism or anything like that. I'm just trying to understand it from the perspective of your predecessors. Because most of Britain, I think all of Britain was Christian at that point. And that's the impression that Indians have about Britain for the last two, fifty to three hundred years. All of Europe, not just Britain. You're saying that, no, there was also this community of occultists. Yeah. Is there a difference between Christianity and I don't know what you'd call this other faith? Occultist in the modern world is often seen as being anti-Christian, being opposed to the religious systems that we have, particularly because Christianity has, despite its benefits, there have also been a lot of problems with the faith and the way that it's impacted on people's freedom to live their lives. And the way also that it's constructed spiritual reality into a black and white approach, whether it's good in their evil and that kind of hard duality is something that magical practitioners are not necessarily very fond of. But the practice of magic in the West has also been framed in Christian terms for a long time. Most of our traditions, most of the things that even people would think of visually as being black magic, a magician in a circle, like calling a demon, for example. This is originally a very Christian form of magic. So, we've come through, we've come through a lot of problems with Christianity and we've been influenced extremely strongly by the empire that England once had because of those people who've come to India and of the English people who traveled two other places and brought back their knowledge with them. So, whether that's voodoo practitioners talking to practitioners because they now live in London and interacting with them and exchanging notes, whether that's the Indian traditions which came back, particularly through many of our magicians previously, travelling to India, learning from the Indians and seeing the things that we have missing. Because what we have in Europe is a broken tradition, we don't have all of the pieces. Why? Well, largely because of the impact of Christianity on like extinguishing all of the pagan religions that existed in Europe before that. So, all of the animism, all of the gods, all of the sense of the sacred, a lot of this was considered to be forbidden. This was all considered to be under the realm of the devil. So, it made it very difficult for us to do things like look at the body because Christianity is very often opposed to the body, opposed to the truths of the body, opposed to sexuality. So, all of these areas have been oppressed, they become occulted, going back to the start of the conversation that they've been driven underground. So, these kind of darker areas are the areas that we've had to go into and find light. And when we find that there's no body tradition, we've looked globally and we've taken from Indian traditions. We've learned from these places, we've learned from Taoism, we've learned from a whole host of cultures in order to find the pieces that are missing in our culture. And India, India's been an incredible while spring for that too. Many more tangential questions. I'd love to go back to the ancient past of Europe. We use the term AD and BC before Christ. So, the BC phase, we're probably talking about the Roman Empire at the beginning of it. And how far back does your understanding of history go to? Do you go back to like 10,000 BC and phases like that? And I'm asking you this based on your studies, your conversations with people from your community. And I'm asking you this because in India there's currently a movement going on, headed by people like Nileshok and Rupa Bhati, who are trying to research upon ancient Indian history. Realizing that the history by taught in history books is a little bit forged. Have you heard of the Ramayan and the Mahbar? Yes. There are two epics. So, these people are trying to date the Ramayan and the Mahbar. Based on text and astronomical records. And the history of India has been dated back by these people, up to 12,000 BC. Now, all over the world, but even in India we have archaeologists who have followed like the Western school of thought. And deeply opposed to this kind of thinking because it breaks all of their beliefs. People like Graham Hahankar who's a British researcher, he's facing the same problem with archaeologists from the West. The history that you and me have learned in school is forged a little bit for sure. Especially when we talk about this before Christ period BC. So, we are realizing, especially a Harakan conversation with Rupa Bhati, what she basically said is that we have a text called the Rigved, which is our oldest Indian text. And we have a bunch of Indian texts, but the oldest one is the Rigved. Based on her research, she feels that it stretches back to 200,000 years. Now, based on archaeological records, we know that man originated from Africa. I know that lots of countries in Africa still follow Voodoo. I know that in India, Tantra has been in a tradition, perhaps since that 200,000 year ago period. We also know that the world has gone through ice ages and what we believe in Sanatana-herm is that the Mahabharat, the Great War that took place, didn't just include people from the Indian subcontinent, but it included people from Syria, up to Mongolia and Russia, up to Sri Lanka. That's the land mass that was included, which was all of humanity, almost back then other than Africa and South America. So, parts of the America is occupied, parts of Africa are occupied and this Asian stretch was occupied. So, the entire Asian stretch supposedly took part in the Mahabharat. Because Europe was not livable at that point because of the temperature conditions. This is the kind of stuff that's come out from the conversations with Rupa Bhati and Malaysia. So, we believe that a big mass of human beings actually migrated to the West over the course of the last 200,000 years. Specifically, if we speak for the Mahabharat, it's dated at 5.561 BC. And we believe that some of the traditions travel to the West. Now, parallelly, I know that the religion that the Vikings followed has a lot of parallels with what we follow in Sanatana. I know that the Celtic culture is in Celtic or Celtic. Okay, that's fine. I thought. Okay. Which was followed in Britain. Even there has a lot of parallels. Are you also kind of following the Celtic faith? Okay. England has been invaded countless times. So, if you look at the Roman invasion, for example, one of the things that the Romans did was, they ended up exterminating pretty much all of the native religion in England. There was a last stand of the Druids in Anglesey, which is a small island, and then top of Wales, in northern Wales, where the Romans essentially massacred the majority of the spiritual leaders in England. Our tradition has been broken for a very long time, and it's been informed by waves of people passing through these lands. So, my bloodline, for example, I'm entirely northern European. So, my ancestors came here between 4,700 AD. So, I'm a late comma to... I'm a late comma to England, and many English people are. We're a really mixed people. Do you know where ancestors came from? Yeah, they came from northern Germany. Where do you think the ancestors came from? I would not be surprised if everyone... Everyone came out of Africa originally. Gotcha. I'm completely in line with your understanding of ancient history, that the timelines are all wrong, because they failed to... They failed to follow where the evidence leads. So, although I would have problems with elements of Graham Hancock's thesis, I think his questions are ones which are worth pursuing. Because I think we all have a common humanity, which is why we're able to have this discussion, because our spiritual technologies are all going to be the same, because they all come out of our bodies. We all have the same bodies. We all respond to the same things. Thank you for understanding my question. Please go on. So, as we were talking about, Mantra has the same effect on everybody. Meditation has the same effect on everybody. We are all humanity, and we're all trying to find the pieces which enable us to live fulfilling spiritual lives and leave the world a better place. So, we've... We're a very young tradition in Europe. Very young. And our magical tradition, although I can talk my history back a long time, our tradition is largely a written tradition, rather than like a guru lineage tradition. So, our history and our lineage in magic is a book based, a written tradition. Like, our teachers are libraries, rather than a chain of initiated gurus who are teaching knowledge like from Math to Ear, Master to Students. But those books contain energy as well. Those books are where it lies, yeah. Okay? Loving this conversation. I've been looking forward to this conversation, perhaps my whole life. So, thank you for being here. How's it going for you to this point? Oh, it's great. It's a really good conversation. I'm trying to set context because this is the first time that the internet is hearing about this kind of stuff. And I would argue that this will be the first time that the global mainstream internet is also hearing about this stuff. So, when we're doing these kind of conversations, I genuinely believe that I'm not asking the questions, and you're not answering with the answers. This is just us channelizing a higher energy that wants to be out there for the public anyway. Do you agree? Do you disagree? Yeah, I agree. I think it's great for us to have an opportunity to find a common language and to clear up misconceptions and just get a sense of what is very naturally hidden tradition. While you say that it's hidden, is this culture growing in Britain or generally all of Europe now? I think there are an unprecedented number of people globally who are looking into these subjects who are trying to understand who they are, where they come from, where they're going, what spiritual tools are available for them to pursue. And so inevitably, people are looking for answers. They don't necessarily find in mainstream religions. So, the interest in the subject is growing exponentially. And there's also a new opportunity for practitioners who are always very few in number to connect. So, the conversations that we're able to have internationally, quietly between people, are creating these new webs of understanding. Gotcha. Okay. I honestly believe at least when it comes to Tantra, that there's a massive rise of Tantra in India. Even in urban metros, everyone's waking up to it. Lots of people are starting practice. And I would argue that this is happening in the world as well. Generally speaking, you know, we were speaking about Celtic culture and Viking culture. Yeah. But there's also obviously Indian parallels with Greco-Roman culture. Greek gods, the Roman gods. We have our versions of them back in India. Not that they prayed too much anymore. We have our Thunder god, who's the equivalent of Zeus. We have the Sun god, Suria. Of all the older gods, Suria is the one that still worshiped a bit in India. But we have higher deities now that are worshiped more in India. Like Kartikeya, Ganesh, Shiva, Hanuman, Durga, Kalima, these deities. I would love to go back into ancient history, the sculpture that you're following. Would you say that it's the tribal faith that existed in England? I think it would be impossible to say that because of the lack of information that we have about those peoples, particularly because they left us no texts. So to give, to give an example, I live in the southwest of England. And the southwest of England is made out of a very, it's got a lot of very hard stone. So granite is like the predominant stone that we have. So where I live there are stone circles in the landscape. There are standing stones. There are the homes of the dead that were built in the Neolithic. What is the home of it? So there's Dulman, which are the graves of the dead. So there are three stones and then a collapsed stone placed on top of it. And then these were previously covered with earth. But these objects, these enigmatic objects in the landscape, were not understood in the Bronze Age. They thought that these had been built by giants and fairies. So these stories have been told about these places over and over again. And now, for example, I have the opportunity to go and work magic in these places in these very ancient places. But I'm also aware that when I'm working there and I'm working with the spirits that I'm also bringing my modern understanding into it into the landscape. And it's been written over many, many times. It's a palimpset. So we find it difficult to talk about a return to like a pure state in England. Whereas in India, you can reach back and you can say, oh, we can talk about some of the earlier deities. He was saying like Syria. And then some of the other deities that you mentioned like Kalimah and Hanuman and Garnash. These are global now. So almost all the magicians, I know, own a Garnash statue and will perform like small acts of Garnash puja. Really. With yeah, I'm certain we're again to look at Kalimah. So that's very much where they look for their understanding of the female divine. So there's always that overlay. But in England, it's very difficult for us to say go back to Celtic gods, you know, whether it's like Bran or Bred or any of these because they're not story. They're not understood. They're not part of the culture. And to go back to it is somewhat artificial for us. You know, we are a late super hybrid. I don't know, there's others. We're at we're a hybrid of all of these things. So we we contain elements of that. We contain the elements that are still written in the landscape. We we're responding still to the spirit that is in the land here. But we have a whole range of stories about them. You know, Celtic stories, Christian stories, like all of all of these are here for us. And so we don't have the ability to go. We will return to a point in the past. Whereas in Europe, for example, you see there are reconstructionists. So in Greece, there are people trying to go back to the Greek gods. Like there's Hellenic reconstructionism that you find really. And there are these various forms of paganism that you find in Europe that are that are trying to to go back to these earlier times for the purpose of their face. So this worship of the oral gods is returning in a way. Yes. Sometimes, sometimes, probably, automatically, sometimes you find it tied up with with right wing nationalism. You know, this is this is often what you find is one of the problems of these ideas of tradition is that that people start to think in terms of like purity or blood or and and it becomes it becomes difficult very quickly. But in England, we don't we don't really have that issue. Gotcha. You know, what I've learned from Rajasind and the likes is that deities have always existed, but they have periods of dormancy. So whenever I look at the deities that existed in Europe, probably 3000 years ago, 4000 years ago, they were still worshiped. But what is 3000 or 4000 years in the grand scheme of things? Yeah. So perhaps they were just resting and they're coming back to the forefront. Through processes like this, but a million people are going to get to know them. All of their energy, you name Bran and. Uh, bride is one of the female gods already and then the horse goddess, but this is these aren't hugely popular things. This is this is still like within a very few people who are looking to pursue that path. Okay. For most of us, everything has been written over so many times that. So for example, another example of where I live, there are a lot of. There are a lot of churches and sites that are dedicated to some Michael, the archangel, some Michael. And some Michael is the archangel of light. And because we're in the West, that that God of light is very important. But there was a God of light before Michael. And that's why people were able to respond to it because they have this archetype within them. They see this happening in the land and they simply call it by another name by a new name. So it's there are there are different levels of the history that you can you can appeal to. Understood. Okay. I will definitely probe you about the Hindu gods that you named, but I'd love to ask you if you yourself being a Western practitioner. Are you drawn to a particular Western deity or deities? Sure. My, my work is. My personal work is very much with the goddess Babylon. Now this is. This is the goddess who you find in the final book of the Bible in Revelation. And the goddess who's described here is. Is evoked by by John of Patmos as a reaction to magic and a reaction to the paganism of ancient Rome. So he takes the idea of the divine female and he turns it into a very powerful but a negative telling of the female divine. So in Europe we had a long Marian tradition, a tradition of worshipping Mary as a goddess. And so I'm not sure if I'm done because there was something missing if you just have if you just have Jesus and you have Jehovah. Then there's no female component so people are saying well what's that going to be so Catholicism in particular worship Mary. And was seen by other Christians as being pagan for worshipping Mary because of the way in which they were pursuing it. That's because the history of Christianity in the way that it was able to spread across Europe was by absorbing a lot of these pagan elements and turning them. Speaking in the language of the people because you need a mother goddess like every culture as a mother goddess so Mary Mary formed the locus for that she formed the focus for the ideas around the female divine. But in focusing on Mary Mary has no sexual aspect because she's a virgin and she gives birth to Jesus so the aspects of female sexuality in particular were demonized and they were all pushed into the character of Babylon in the book of Revelation. And my interest, my particular interest is very much like it's similar to the forbidden aspects of Tantra that like as you see with like the five ends right. So we're doing that, but we're doing that with Christianity. Okay, going back to what I said about Hindu Tantra context our main goal is to reach the divine on the way your given tests and you need to pass those tests and you're also given said these and blessings. The thing is when you actually take up actual Tantra practice in India and when you're guided by a guru. You get to choose the pathway you want to go down and I'm not going to get into the details of the pathways, but broadly speaking there's a Dakshinachar which is like an easy way of going about it. It's a Southwick way where animal sacrifice and me teaching are not a part of this process. But if you want to make it a little more feels there's Vamachar and the most feels one is Koolachar. The one even more feels than this is Agahura which is not for the average everyday person. So you're saying that these are elements of European Koolachar Tantra. Yes. Okay, because in Koolachar we speak about the five M's. I don't remember the Sanskrit words for it. I think it's Matsu which is fish like seafood fish. Mass meat, Madira alcohol. I think metum which is sex and there's another M which loosely translates to grain. So these are the five elements, alcohol, sex, meat, fish and grain. So you end up using these five elements in your practice. It's similar. I know it's not exact but it can be understood in terms of that kind of work. So the techniques that are very often used in Magikar, these forbidden aspects. So yes, those are things which feature in the practice. Peter, let's talk about your story. Sure. You're not from a family that is into the occult at all. No. What's your background? Like in your childhood where you draw under the stuff. Yes, so I grew up in a secular household. Not antagonistic towards any of the faiths. I went to a church school. So my school was attached to a Christian church. So I would attend a church. We would have prayers but it wasn't heavily religious. It was very clear to me that none of the people who were engaged in these practices really believed in what they were doing. It was clear that they were going through a series of actions. But they weren't having any experiences or any results from that. And I found much more truth and energy and life when I read about, for example, the Greek gods, when I read poetry, when I was in the land. Like this is where I found my own personal spiritual experiences. What do you mean in the land? So there are places within the landscape that contain power. In England. Yeah. In the same way that you find all over the world. And when you find one of these power places and you encounter that, it transforms you. Like the storm hinge. Like Stonehenge. Stonehenge is the most powerful place in England. Stonehenge is a troubled place. Troubled. Yeah. I mean it's in the middle of a very large sacred landscape, which was laid out in the Bronze Age, but many of the alignments and things have been destroyed. The roads run too close to it. You can no longer get close to the stones because it's owned by English heritage who police the site. So it's very difficult to understand and feel the energy of that place in the way that it used to be. It's been pretty broken up. It's a temple that's got up to it by modernism. Yeah. I think that's fair to say. You could still have a spiritual experience there, but it's in a disputed and a damaged landscape, naturally has an effect on the place. Okay. So where are some powerful spots? I couldn't share them. Okay. I appreciate that. Okay. Don't worry about it. Fine. But you're saying there are these powerful spots that the British community knows about. Yes. Okay. At some point in our future because we're going to have so many more meetings, would you become fitgable taking me to a spot? Yeah, I'd love to. But you just can't reveal it on a public forum. Yeah, I prefer not to. Okay. Like in Australia, I'm going to show you the rock. Yeah. And by the Australian tribal faith is a whole other topic. Yeah. Have you explored that? I'm aware of that. Yeah. Okay. But same parallels. I had this same conversation with an Aboriginal man that I met. And he got emotional talking about it. Yeah. Because you realize that we're all the same, all doing the same things. Yeah. You know, in Tantra, in India, when we are going about a mantra and practices, people are restoring it completely Lo Aura, and as I can say, I don't know, I could describe the places I'm like that. mankind in our entire environment as a position or knowledge. No, especially when we work directly, or releasing energy. I'm talking to you here. Human beings are talking to another human. My reality and consciousness is meeting your reality and consciousness, can't see which are present around us. And as you keep evolving, some filters are removed from your head and you're able to see those things. But when you're going about a disciplined practice that's rooted in faith, you're releasing large amounts of energy. What's believed in Sanatana term is that that large amount of energy is used for your own spiritual growth. Or you could use it for something that materially benefits you. Yeah. And in some very unfortunate situations, some people may use that large amount of energy that's released through tantric practice for malicious purposes like harming another human mean. That's where this element of Kala, Jadu, of black magic comes from. Fair explanation? Yeah. Does black magic exist in your world as well? Yeah, absolutely. And there are people who use it with malicious indent. Yes. For what? Exactly. The same things that you'll find in your culture is to harm other people, to accrue things that they don't have the right to possess. But it's probably overstated in terms of Western magic because there are so few practitioners and finding practitioners of a level where they can be effective in these kind of practices is vanishingly rare. So, although people will talk about these things, it's probably overstated in terms of this efficacy. There aren't enough, like strong black magical practitioners for it to be like much of a much of an issue. Would you see that what you were doing as weight magic? I would avoid seeing things in terms of those two binaries. I wouldn't say that there's black or there's white because it depends on your perspective. You're just concerned with your practice. Yes. Got you. And so my practice to some people may look black and to some people may look white and to some people may look gray. You were speaking about your childhood. You said that you felt energy in the land. Yeah. So, you came across these energized spots even when you were a child. Yeah. Yeah. Just by destinies. Yeah. Yeah. Just by just it happens. Okay. I was very fortunate to to grow up in a place with a lot of very special places. So, not everyone has that opportunity. Okay. What happened in your adulthood? Like, how did you begin your process? So, I've always been a questioning individual. I've always been interested in pushing my boundaries, like physically, intellectually, like looking at ideas that you're not necessarily meant to look at. So, I explored radical atheism for a while because I was so disappointed with the way that the that the Christian faith in particular treated people. Then I read a lot of works of existentialism and I started to question what it meant to be alive. Then at university I began to look at these rejected areas of the occult. And I started to perform experiments as people do. So, I had a university. Yeah. You had study material in? No, no, but personally, not through got not through official channels. Got to go on. So, I began, I began experimenting with meditation practices. I began using tarot cards and it was very clear to me that the universe was far stranger and wilder than official reality would want you to think. And so, I continued to read, I continued to educate myself, I met people, I performed experiments and my worldview gradually evolved. Okay. Those experiments that you performed early on, there was an outcome that you can convince to that reality can be meant. Absolutely. Are you comfortable sharing any example or you'd like to keep that private? I'd like to keep a lot of that private. But what I can say is that I have had encounters with spirits which were not me. So, one of the critical experiences I think you have as a magician is an understanding that it isn't something that's happening in your head, that there are external entities which don't have bodies like us with whom we can interact and who display intelligence. I do with us right now. I think they're always with us. And I think when you have these kind of conversations, you start to draw them close to you. I had some funky dreams last night. I saw a man clearly not human, big beard, black hat, black coat. I just wanted to get my attention. And I think I saw a girl as well. A little girl. Does it drink any bell for you? Or does it just happen? This is just happens. But this is what occurs. I've had these conversations with people. There's a very famous conversation that took place between Collion and Sigmund Freud and they were talking about spirits and manifestation. And as they were talking, there was suddenly a rap and Jung said, that's it. There's a spirit present. There's something here which isn't us and for it is like that. And then it happened again. And that's what occurs with the practice of magic. And this is why magic is something that requires a great deal of discipline because you draw things to yourself. You draw spirits to yourself. And as we know, there are hungry ghosts, not everything out there is good. But there are lots of things which are interested in humans that are interested in the energies that we have. So you're saying that just by having this conversation, we are attracting attention from the spirit world for sure. Yeah. Always. Well, that's the story of my life. Had enough of these experiences. I've had so many experiences. I can't share online. Some doc where I'm just used to it by this point. Should I be afraid of you on any level? You know, you don't have a reason to it. Right. You're not crossing me. Yeah. But do people drag crossing you? Yeah. But inevitably, inevitably there's some complex. If you're a magician, then you tend to, you tend to end up attracting like, you know, issues that you need to resolve. Do you mean like skeptics? Not skeptics. No. Okay. You mean like other people who understand this. There are other people who, who, who, who you come into conflict with. And you see this in tribal cultures. You see this all the time. You have a tribe which has a magician and you have another tribe which has a magician and the two magicians end up coming into conflict. And in the modern world, people are drawn into conflict very easily because we're, we're all on social media. We all have a, a platform in the world. And there are people who like you and then people who don't like you. And there are people who wish to do you harm and wish to be people who do do good to you. What are you feeling in this conversation? That this is a benefit conversation. This is a, this is a great opportunity to talk to someone who's, who's on a genuine spiritual path. Yeah. What do you think my intention is with this? I think your intention is to learn. Yeah. I think you're completely open to this because you've had these experiences and because you have a practice and, and we're able to talk on a level and find a, a common, a common language between us. I think it's the 26th of November, 2024. I want this same episode to be viewed a hundred years from now. Perhaps you and me will be gone by that point. At least from these bodies. Yeah. And people should be viewing this and gaining some value even then. And hopefully at that point, it might just be a beginner's episode. Yeah. Because the human kind would have evolved. Yeah. But coming back to, uh, this energy that we're speaking about. So I asked you that should I be afraid of you? And you said that no, you're not crossing me. We had podcasts where people have tried crossing you on a more subtle level. I wouldn't get myself into that situation. I'm very careful about who I I talk to and what I talked to them about. I mean, as we said at the start of the conversation, like I can introduce myself as an occultist in a magician to some people to other people I won't tell them. I'll tell them I'm a writer. If they ask me what I write, I'll say I write about history and I write about poetry. Why? Just that cuts it. That kills the conversation because they don't want to go back. Wow. But you are writing what history and poetry. Exactly. So it's not a lie. It's not a lie. Gotcha. Um, you had an idea about how this conversation would be? I listened to you very carefully. I looked at you talking with and I considered that this was an opportunity to have a, a clear, constructive conversation. So I was, I was very happy to explore you do have a heightened intuition at this point, right? Yeah. Okay. And you are guided by a spirit guide. Yeah. The spirit guide in your own astrological chart. Have you been able to get in touch? Yeah. Okay. Is it Babylon? No. Okay. No. Babylon's still higher than that. That's yeah. Okay. Baden meve never ever crossing a lot. No problem. Are you comfortable comparing it to an Indian deity just so that our viewers can understand better and study when I have a better understanding? Sure. Sure. Um, you're looking at the aspects that you'd find somewhere around Kalima or you could look to the Tibetan. You could look at kurakula. You could, um, look at any of the more raffle deities. Okay. Okay. Ugridev does the same meaning. Sure. So you can't pray to Babylon at home or you can. Yeah. Yeah. This prayer is, prayer is fine. Yeah. Okay. And you have a certain ritual associated with Babylon. Sure. I mean, like a, like a handy practitioner, like I have an altar, like burn candles. I make offerings. I say prayers comfortable talking about the offerings. Um, yeah, the offerings that generally be wine is an offering that's very acceptable red wine, blood offerings are occasionally made. This isn't like a common offering, but blood offering I've made blood offerings. Yodong. Yes. Okay. Yeah. Um, animal sacrifices and something that really happens in the West anymore, because our relationship with our relationship with animals is so different from previous periods that people don't have the skills to perform these kind of offerings. I have friends who work in, um, African diaspora religions. So voodoo or Brazilian religions like kimbanda, and they will use animal offerings a lot because it's part of their culture. It's part of what they do, and they have the skill and the expertise to do that. We don't have that there, and it's not, it's not a common thing. It's a part of our culture as well. Yeah. When it comes to Kalima, yeah, it's called balebrata. Yeah. And it still happens in Kalima, Kidi women, which is one of our energy hotspots and it's. Yeah. So those kind of things that very often that practitioner is making an offering of sexual fluids or of their own blood. This is this is what's normally used here. How did you learn all this? How did I learn all this? To people you met, a combination of books, people and contact with that. This is this is how our tradition works. And how many years has it been? 30, 35 years maybe? I'm going to pause this conversation just for a bit with still rolling, but can I shake your hand in terms of thank you for being on my show because you know, like I understand the intensity of your work. And I'm honored that you're speaking about it on our show. So appreciate deep gratitude. But let's carry on. We recently had someone called brother Salvador on our show. He's a real life exhaustist in India. And he's very rooted in the question and he prayed for me. And it was one of the most positive energy days of my career lately. So I know that you'd still be able to find a lot of Roman Catholics, a lot of Christians who are extremely rooted in their own spiritual sensibility. And as is the case with any religion in the world, you will find people who are extremists. I knew an extremist at one point. And she would view what I did in my own faith as some form of deep in worship. So she viewed Kalima as demonic and she was very against my worship of Kali. I view Kalima as my mom. And that's the equation I share with her. She's mom. That's it. And it's not that my journey has furthered that much where my practices are as fierce and as ogres yours. I don't know if it'll ever be that fierce. But right now, I just have an emotional connection with Kali. She never understood it because of how Kali looked. And I always questioned why that human being came into my life. In retrospect, I've realized that it's for the sake of understanding the world better. Not everyone would be open to your own spiritual practice or the way you look at things. And I know that every extremist from every religion looks at other faiths in our demeaning manner. So there's extremists in Abrahamic faiths. There's extremists in my faiths. The extremists in my faiths look down upon other faiths. But there's also open people in every faith. There's spiritual people who feel a sense of human kinship, you know, they feel a connection with each other. And this conversation is for those people. Now you spoke about making blood offerings on the surface. That sounds like something that would scare the average person. Hey, this guy is like offering blood. Is he worshipping demons? What is he doing? Okay. I understand this. I understand what you're doing because we're dealing with bending reality here. And we don't even know the ancient guidelines that were in place for thousands of years before you and me were even born. You're just following ancient guidelines because that is how our reality works. If you do a certain set of steps, you will bend reality in certain ways. That is what a Hindu puja is as well. That is what your version of a puja is as well. This is just a part of your puja. Right? Are you comfortable talking about a blood sacrifice? Yeah, I would love to know your perspective on it. Whatever you're comfortable sharing it. And I also bow down to your deities because this is coming from them. So I take the information speak about these things. What I'm doing is, is as you say, you know, it's quite left-hand path. Like it's it's not a practice that I'm suggesting is something that the majority of people should pursue. Absolutely not. This is a very limited, difficult thing that only a few individuals are ever going to be drawn to do. And some of the individuals who are drawn to do it will also be somewhat disturbed. Like you'll find people who have psychological issues, so it won't let's come to work. So it's not without risk. It's not without risk of obsession. It's not without risk to people who are engaged in practices of self harm or people who are particularly masochistic. And I'm confident that I have none of those characteristics within me. But for me to make an offering of my blood to my goddess is an understanding that that all of my blood ultimately belongs to the mother goddess. That the my blood ultimately all flows into her cup. So for me to make a blood offering is simply for me to reaffirm that promise, that my ex and my intentions are all towards that point, that my blood ultimately belongs to her. So it's not a right that I do regularly. There is a famous right that that's in the Western tradition called the massive phoenix, where one cuts oneself and makes an offering of the blood to the setting sun. And that's done like that can be done like literally every day, just with a small amount of blood. Very few people engaging that. I don't I don't engage in that. I've used I've performed that ritual in the past. But my blood offerings tend to be tends to be much more precise when I'm doing something major, when I'm making major commitment. So rather than it being a regular puja practice, this is something which is safe for a major and major ritual. So yeah, I've engaged in various forms of ordeal practice for the goddess. So I've worked with cutting, I've worked with hooks. So I've been I've done flesh suspensions, I've done these kind of like body rights. What does a place has been? And when you hang from metal hooks, when you're here, that's a ritual. So this kind of work, these kind of these kind of ritual practices you find in the West. Rare, but these practices Okay. You know, I spoke about my Christian friend. I in my eyes and I've had countless Christian friends who were rooted in their own spiritual journey as well. I do feel she was a bit of an extremist. And she would look down upon what I did. I know she looks down upon what you do as well. Yeah, yes, absolutely. But I'm bringing her up because I'm trying to go back to the time that Christianity took over Europe. I am sure there were extremist Christians back then as well. It was an extreme religion back then. I'm sure they looked down upon ancient European practice in the same manner. They destroyed ancient European practice. If you look at ancient statues in the museum, you'll find very often that they've had there, then nose is smashed off. And you look at them and you think, oh, this must just be a delicate part of the of the of the sculpture and the spindanics, but no, no, no, the Christians deliberately destroyed the gods that were in the statues by smashing the noses off the statues and often carving crosses on them as well. Why the Norse? Because it's where the breath comes in and the breath is the spirit. So the bringing in of the spirit statue, that's where the life is the prana. So it prevents them being able to to function magically. The Sphinx also has a destroyed Norse. Yeah. So this is a deliberate counter magic because they believe that there were demons in the statues because the Christianity believes that all rival or rival gods are demons. This is the difficulty with the approach that's taken because it's begun as Judaism. And in Judaism, they have a tribal god and the the way that their culture had cohesion was that the people all had to worship the same god. And then when Christianity came along, it took the same idea of a singular god and a singular truth and a singular way of doing things. And in order to do that, all of the pagan gods had to be demonised. Had to become demons, had to be described as demons, had to be described as the devil. So they have a very limited view of the spiritual universe. And that's the difficulty with talking with Christians. So for example, you still see churches that will ban people having a yoga class in the church hall because they believe that this is this is satanic, just the practice the practice of half the yoga is a, you know, I see this is a sashanak thing. My friend would say this to me like, oh, why you've been meditating. This is demonic. What you're doing now? And I'm like, no, I really think that this is an assumption when you're in because you've not experienced it yourself. I don't have bad intention towards any human being. Why would I why would I do something demonic? But she couldn't wrap her head around that. Yeah. And I reached a point with her where I said that, here, you know what, your brain washed in your way, I'm brainwashed in my way. And her response to that was no, you're the only one who's brainwashed. I'm not brainwashed. And I didn't see anything after that. Yeah. This is the difficulty when when dealing particularly with the Abrahamic religions is that they they have a very, they have a very narrow understanding of the spiritual world. And so they will reject everything which is outside of their understanding. You know, in saying all this, I do believe in Jesus Christ myself, I do believe he's one of my angels along with her, my hanjing along with Kalima. And on some level, I don't think that this is what Jesus Christ would have wanted. But the people who were responsible for spreading Christianity, I do believe that over the years, perhaps they altered some of his original teachings in order to spread it geographically, because historically speaking, the human being is a warring species. We've always been at war. And as we know is the case with modern politics, religion is a tool that can be used for political benefit. So at one point, there were some people who were responsible for spreading Christianity who added this level of extremism and intensity to it, which may not have been there originally. Unfortunately, it stayed in some pocket store. You speak to a lot of Christians afraid. They relaxed. I had one of the best conversations of my life with brother Salvador. He had respect for me and he understood that at the end of the day, we're both chasing divinity. If only we lived in a world where every religious person understood that, that's good, live inlet love where human beings at the end of the day, we're all born in different cultures for a reason. I'm sorry I'm getting a little emotional about this. No, no, no, it's the idea. I mean, speaking to the idea of Jesus, it's very difficult to understand who the historical Jesus was. And it's difficult also to understand very often what people mean when they say it, because you could take the, you can take different parts of his teaching, and you can tell quite different stories about who he was as a man and what the basis of his teaching is. And when you were talking about exorcism, exorcism was a very critical part of the Christian faith that begin with, where Jesus was, and I know that I've said to some people, but Jesus was working as a magician in terms of the way that he was performing miracles, in the way that many God men were doing in in the ancient Near East. He was engaged in a whole series of things that I don't see as being particularly remarkable, because I see that they've been done by magicians in the same period who didn't achieve the same status as him. And I think there are good aspects of the teaching, but for me, overall, the difficulty is that it says there is only this one way of doing things, and that we have a fixed duality of good and evil, and that all of the things that we say in the book of rules is good and everything else is bad. And I think that that leads people to some very difficult conclusions. Yeah. You know, I brought up the book, The Autobiography of a Yogi. I highly recommend it to you and to anyone from the West. It was Steve Jobs' favorite book as well. We have Virat Kohli from our country, because the country is biggest celebrity currently. It's his favorite book as well, because it's got a lot of secrets of reality tailored in, and it's a very difficult book to get through. But at the end of it, you'll come out a different person. Speaks about Kriya Yoga as a specific kind of yoga related to your own body's energy. It's very advanced. You need to prepare your body for it. The intention is to connect with the divine once again. But it specifically focuses on six masters, Lahiri Mahasaya, Yukteshwar Giri, Yoga and Paramahansu is the author, Mahaftar Babaji, who is one of the most advanced sages that the earth has ever seen. Bhagwan Shri Krishna from Sanatana and Lord Jesus Christ. And it looks at these six as the advanced masters who forwarded the secrets of spiritual advancement to human beings. And I've practiced with that school of yoga for years now. I feel a connection with each of those masters individually. I am of the belief that Jesus Christ was definitely a sage. It definitely reached a level of advancement. But I'm also pretty convinced that his original teachings are slightly altered. Yeah, I mean, what if a lot of what we think of this being Christianity is probably better thought of as the work of St Paul. Paul very much set the mould for what Christianity became. And when you look at Paul's work, he draws on paganism to a huge degree. He draws on the ancient Greek philosophers. He quotes and paraphrases them. It's quite easy to do a Google search and find out how many phrases that you think are Paul's phrases are in fact taken from the philosophers. Because Christianity when it began in the Roman Empire lacked a philosophical call. It wasn't a very developed religion. And so they took a lot of ideas from other places. And then when Christianity became a state religion with the Roman Empire, it took on a lot of ideas from the German influence. So the German ideas of the Sun god, of the undying Sun god, become folded into Christianity. And then when you look at the way that they have the worship, as I said earlier, of the Virgin Mary and of the cult of the saints and the cult of the angels, well, as the Voodoo practitioners know, these very often masks of other earlier deities or other forces. Because people find it very difficult to have a relationship with a distant creator god. And they need a, they need to talk to a spirit which is closer to them. And we have that in paganism. And so Christianity had to almost recreate paganism with the angels and with the saints and enable people to connect on a closer level to people in stories that were more like they were. So the essence offered with the angels and the saints is still the same. Yeah, I think there are there are continuities that we see because we were all, we're all dealing with the same forces that are flowing through these forms. I agree. Wow. Can't believe we've gotten into this realm of conversation feeling good. Yeah, I feel great. Okay. You spoke some time ago about a blood sacrifice that you do to the sun. Mm-hmm. You've done this as well. I've done this as well. Yeah. What is the outcome of doing that blood sacrifice? And this is a sacrifice which is really done for, for a couple of things. One, for vitality, for health, for energy, for connection with the cycles of the sun as it moves through the day and through the year. So the God of our universe is very much the sun. The sun is the source of life, the sort of light. And by identifying ourselves with the sun in its various phases, at its rising, at its midpoint, at its setting and at midnight, we also identify ourselves with the undying circle of the sun. So we become part of that larger cycle. And it's part of them, part of becoming part of the, part of the machinery of the universe. Because however, however strong my personal will is, however dedicated and focused I am, I have a limited source of energy. But the sun, as the light and force of the universe, has, has energy that I can draw on and I can become, I can become a tune to. And I can, I can pull those powers through me. So it's part of that. You said you do this in front of the setting sun, right? Yeah. Are you comfortable talking a little bit more about the process? Sure, this is the, the rich time I'm talking about as a rich all that was introduced by, I was to Crowley and it's called the mass of the Phoenix, because the Phoenix is the, the symbol of the bird, which is consumed on the net, on the net, and is, is reborn like the sun. So the idea of going through that cycle of death and rebirth with the sun, as it passes through the day and as it passes through the year, also places us in an understanding that we are part of these processes, that we can go through our life's journey and we can go through inter-death and inter-rebirth if we wish to go into the river. And you felt that change in your own body, I felt the change in my own body with it. I'm really, I'm really hemophobic. I react very badly to blood. So for me as a ritual to perform it, to cut myself or on other occasions to be cut by someone else, is, is very demanding for me. It's not something that I choose, it's not something that I like, I move to, like as a natural predilection. So there's a great deal of energy and power that can be unlocked for me from doing that. Are you seeing a pre-oh-oh-weld doing this? Yes, yeah. There is a particular prayer that goes over. Okay, that's how you make it work. Yes. If someone just takes the hand and cuts in for an office setting son, no, it's not like he's doing. This is how bulgeurs work. You need to combine the mandras with the combined everything. Rituals. Yeah. Okay. Is this what people go with witchcraft? In the west it could be called witchcraft. Witchcraft is difficult to use as a term because on a on a on a global basis, witchcraft is always associated with, with evil. And the witch as a figure is often seen as a supernatural figure and not a human being. So a lot of my work, which is more natural, which is more spontaneous, which is more done in the land and with with natural components like the plants, stones, waters, wells. All of this can be could be under the idea of witchcraft. This is more a more an amistic kind of way of working, whereas magic very often describes a more formal way of working, perhaps with a circle on the ground and perhaps with, you know, all the candles and paraphernalia, it's a much more a much more ceremonial approach. So, so yes, like I, I have been described as a witch. It's not a word that I use for myself because I don't think it's appropriate to to use a lot of these terms, like unless it's applied to you. If I am practicing something that is witchcraft, then I am, then then in that moment, I'm a witch, but that's not, that's not my identity in the same way that, you know, as a magician, when I step outside of my circle, like I'm not, you know, I'm leaving something there, I'm not, I'm not carrying that with me everywhere I go. But yes, witchcraft and magic in the west, these are these are quite interchangeable terms. Gotcha. You know, you spoke with the prayer you said during the Sunday tour and the prayers you do in all your rituals. Is it in Latin? No, I, I cannot use Latin. I use, I use some Greek. I use some Hebrew. I use English. Yeah, like, I use some magical languages. I do some working in Nochen, which is an angelic language. So, you know, very often you find, so if I think about say a ritual that I do regularly, a ritual I do every day, it has Greek words, it has Hebrew words, it has English words. In fact, yes, I do. And there's another ritual that I do that does have Latin. But these are, the use of these different languages is very, very common in magic because like with mantra, it puts you into an altered state because it's a language and a mode of expression that you only use in a ritual setting. So you're able to access that, that, that part of yourself by using these languages. Yeah. I had some, what Gus related to Sanskrit and what I've learned is that, see the mantra, um, om nama shivai. When you break it up into different parts, each part has an effect on your body and mind. Om makes a Vila sodhum nama shi, vah, yeah. Each of those syllables individually has an effect on me, has an effect on the listener. And this effect is amplified even more if you're doing it in your own mind. I do believe that this is the case with other ancient languages as well. I do believe that Hebrew contains the same effect or something similar. So does Greek. So does Latin. I think that the modern version of English that you and me speak and thinking is a fairly modern language that contains traces of power for sure. There is power in words like joy, um, happy. Maybe there's negative powers like sad, but the word Pida, which means sad sadness, duk. Duk at the, I think comes from Arabic if I'm not mistaken, definitely comes from Persia or the Gulf. These words contain power just because of how the syllables are aligned makes you feel a certain way. So when we're doing a a mantra or a prayer, you're effectively coding something inside your own body and mind to work a certain way with power. You agree with your disagree? Absolutely agree. Absolutely agree. That's, you know, you know, when you're vibrating these words, when you're, um, whether you're doing it internally or externally, it, it transforms the body and it affects different energy centers, like in a sense, then you've been doing the work. For some time, you can, you can feel and you can move this through your body and you can vibrate these words through your body and be filled with them, be filled with these devices. You see this, you see this with, um, in the Hebrew tradition, as well, you see it in Kabbalah, a lot. But yeah, these are, these are common, these are common technologies that we're all responding to. Okay. Um, you know, we have a four to five hour slot to talk and usually with these conversations, there's a point where I feel that hey, let's cap off one episode. I think we've reached that point where the end of a first episode, because there's a lot more questions I have for you. I wish to talk a little bit about satanism and how it fits into this whole bracket. I wish to talk about, uh, how people in your part of the world turn to Hindu gods, uh, for the sake of practice. And I definitely wish to talk about lower beings as well, because what I believe in my heart is that if you learn more about the darkness, you move more towards the light. So more on this in episode two with Peter, I hope episode one was a good introduction, uh, for you to, I'm sure it was a great introduction for you, but how was it for you? That was excellent. That was a great conversation. Really happy to talk to you on that. Yeah. Uh, I hope you had a nice time. I hope you were comfortable. Yeah. I've been waiting for this conversation for my whole life, honestly. So very excited to move in episode two. Thank you, Peter. That was the episode four today, ladies and gentlemen. And I promise you episode two gets even grittier, very, very intense getting to know about these topics from a non Indian lens, because we spoken about these topics when it comes to all a pantra themed episodes. And I'm assuming that all of you Rajashin and the fans have also gotten through this entire episode. Tantra is a subject that's relevant for the world audience. It's what we used to be for a major part of the last hundreds of thousands of years. That's what I genuinely this is the most raw form of human spirituality. And it's about time that this raw form of spirituality returns to the global internet. That's what we intend on doing through TRS over the years. We're going to be covering the topics of voodoo of hoodoo of Indonesian tribal culture of the Australian Aboriginal. So please send in your guest recommendations. Tell us what you thought of this episode and watch out for episode two with the legendary Peter Gray."}