{"Episode Name": "Shiva Tantra Saadhu On TRS - Bhairava, Kashmiri Shaivism & Naga Saadhus | TRS", "Podcast Name": "Beer Biceps - The Ranveer Show", "Episode Link": "https://the-ranveer-show.simplecast.com/episodes/shiva-tantra-saadhu-on-trs-bhairava-kashmiri-shaivism-naga-saadhus-trs-ClJIKopW", "duration": "01:16:00", "text": " I don't want to start this conversation by telling you something really really weird but even ghosts and spirits they have their own very peculiar smell. What is it smell like? It is blissful. Have you met a Sado who claims to be much older than normal human beings? I know him, Tafeyo means thousands. So he's seen the British occupation of India a lot. He's seen the Bovellara a lot more than that. He's living the life of a normal person. Yes, businessman. I don't know if I should be putting this out. You know about the seven children Jesus. Did you ever phase our doing namja? I can say this right now on camera because I don't do it anymore. I started to realize that just after two or three days this mantra was continuously ringing. I called by Grigie again and I'm like, you know what Grigie this is what is happening I'm taking a leak? It is just not stopping which apparently happened to be a really good thing. The mantra challenge is yes. What's the life of a Sado like up there? I remember surviving and getting four months together. So one food in the entire day which is after the offering of Devi, after the offering of Flora and Phonans, when you will need this is not easy task. It just box you down. I remember I used to cry. Because me basically was the land of Paris. Unfortunately there's a lot of energies which are kind of it. There are places that have been myself and I felt wailing and crying of a lot of people as if there was a massacre. It's huge. Do the Sado's up in the Himalayas ever speak about the Kalki of Tafeyo. He is unfortunately or fortunately found by his own watch. Every time something bad happens in Prithviloka, he has to come down. But far away from our time. Well the way we see time as you know linear past present in future, it is not really like that. Kalki of Tafeyo apparently. When was the first time you came across an end? I could sense that there is somebody sitting right. I just didn't. I could feel it. I opened my eyes and I for at least I think a couple of seconds I could see a huge figure. Now because of the fact that I was doing the Ramjabhara, think in your head who would have been sitting right next to me? I think he's sitting next to you. Yes. I think India is that one country in the world where you'll see more people get inclined to monkhood and spirituality than any other country. And Yevarajrivasthav has had one of those life stories where he left the traditional city life. He was an engineer. He went to the gym. He was a power lifter. He did all those regular urban Indian things, but then switched over into the world of monkhood. He's lived with sages in the Himalayas. He has lots of experiences related to the Himalayas, related to Indian spiritualism. And today we'll understand Sanatana, the more deeply we'll understand Kashmiri, share his own much more deeply. And we'll understand tantra much more deeply. Of course, this particular episode was deeply experiential. We got deep into the things that Yevarajrivasthav has seen. Once his hermit like journey began, once his second innings began, very, very heartfelt, very, very, educated episode of the RS with Yevarajrivasthav. It's now, no, enjoy yourself. That's right. We're here for the vibes, baby. Hoping for some good vibes. Very excited to speak with Yevarajr. Likewise. Okay. There's a mustard, the burning in front of us. We've only recently started burning mustard, the aas in the middle of podcasts. When I entered this room, the first thing which caught my attention, energy wise was the stable end of the eye. And I was looking at it for some time. I can keep looking at it. It gives me a meditation and life. Yeah. My counter question, who advised you to use the mustard oil in the Dia in the studio, not any other oil, key or otherwise? I'm being mentored a little bit for my practice by Rajashe Nandi. And he suggested that I like mustard the aas. When I'm doing my better of numb job. Quite energetic. And anybody who is slightly even into picking up energies would be able to he or she would be drawn to it. I'm constantly going to be looking at it there right now. Yeah. That's great. That's great. Then you kind of get addicted to the smell of it after a point. Very competitive. It depends on how acute your smelling senses are. Well, I don't want to start this conversation by telling you something really, really weird, but even ghosts and spirits and everything. You see, they have their own very peculiar smell. Sometimes because of the fact that human perceptions are not that tuned to smelling or hearing these voices or tastes or sounds. You see, when you sort of do a little bit of sadna, maybe with your gurus grace by the Kripao of Bhagavati, I think you sort of pit these things up. I remember if you don't mind, can I tell you a story? Please. I think last year I was in Bangalore with one of my Guruji's who got me initiated into Natha Parampara and Rishisham Pradahe of Natha Parampara in specific. So Guruji and I am coming back from this, you know, walk from one of these mountains in Bangalore near Banargatta. Late evening, of course, coming back and all of a sudden we hear sounds. You know, sounds that you would generally avoid thinking it's cricket, some insects, you know, it's jungle, you know, what else can you expect? But then my Guruji's like, uh, Meh-tanand-dha, do you see something? Meh-tanand-dha is my is the name which has been given to me by my Guruji. I'm like, do you hear something? I'm like, yeah, but what is it? Okay, try to focus and I'm focusing. And this is, if I can remember it, try to wailing noise as if somebody's really calling for help. And something which you would, and I'm trying to sort of recall, Ravi, you know, these voices of sounds you don't hear using your ears. It just somehow you just hear it. Okay. And so I don't get intimidated by these things. All right. But I'm asking, curious, what is this? And then slowly and gradually, we started to walk towards the source of the sound and all around us, there's the sound. Do you know what these sounds were? They were chudhales. Calling, just calling, not name calling. And as soon as we are, you know, focusing more and more on these sounds, you know, they are just louder and louder in your own head. Not the years doing the listening. It's a very different kind of sound experience. So there are many, many stories and a lot of times I also sort of smell the same smell around also in other places as well. Sometimes when I sit down deep in meditation, great smell, it's a cosmic smell. If you burn copper at, let's say, 150 degrees, it would start to smell like something which perhaps even us astronauts have said, this is how the universe smells. It is crazy, but it is blissful. What does it smell like? Like I said, it's very, very different from how you and I are tuned to smell smells. It's very distinct. But at the same time, I think it was for me. So I can be very sure as to how it went for me. It suddenly did give me a feeling that it is something which is not earthly. Yeah, I was like, swoosh. You know, you've given me a beginning with a lot of tangents that I can go on as a podcast host. Okay. But the simple tangent that I'll take is how Bhagavati is keeping me in her guide and guard. And I hope it is the same for everybody around in the room as well. It's good to have you here. Likewise. Yeah, I've said this on some other podcasts as well. But when I was growing up and I started wondering more about the land I was born in, I think one of my dreams when it came to India was the possibility to explore the Himalayas and meet people like yourself who are true seekers for lack of better words in some ways. And please correct me if you disagree with me. I feel like you're a sadhu. Are you a sadhu? Well, I don't mind people calling me whatever they feel like you call me UV. You call me however you want to be right. So names are for others. I don't need to know myself over the name. Do I really need an association of a name to know myself attack? Do I really also need that tag? I really don't need to know myself through a particular name or something, right? So you call me anything. Doesn't matter. What's the difference between a tantric sadhu sadhuk? These are all methods or in Hindi we say upaya of knowing your own true self. Reach in the supreme divine whichever name that you want to tag it with because that is nameless quite literally, formless quite literally and just consciousness. So if you're able to or try to read that supreme consciousness through your tannu and through the through a particular way or marga your tannric you are a Bhakta if you are doing if you are immersed in Bhakti or the love for the divine. It's very unfortunate again that we have to explain and define love these days. I just hope that 20 years down the line it doesn't happen that there's a university who is teaching a course of how to love. It is such an innate and intrinsic and inherent attribute to almost everybody, everybody here in the room everybody outside but love is unfortunately very misunderstood. So if you're able to have that pure divine love and surrender you are a Bhakta. How old are you in human years? In my early 40s. So who introduced you to tantra? Well this is I would say I will have to actually think about it as to where did I first hear this word and what was my first impression of you know how I understood tantra. I'm also a very Western guy around here all right and I have had very Western influences in my life also. So at one point of time I think tantra was something which usually the world knows as you see how but this is just one m of the five m's in tantra right Kashmiri shavism which unfortunately is called Kashmiri shavism even right now when I'm talking to you which is called the trika. That's the actual name. That's the real name of the philosophy itself. What people referenced was Kashmiri shavism. Kashmiri shavism actually had a lot to contribute towards this particular philosophy in itself but it is not Kashmiri Kashmiri it would be very unjust to the philosophy itself to tag it Kashmiri. The original word by all the masters they have used the trika. Sometimes I've also read and been told by my Guruji also that Maha Charya, Abhinavka, times self, termed it as Paramadwata which is the Paramadwata that is how they would want to look at the philosophy. I think Abhinavka Gupta has been spoken about on the show earlier by an archaeologist called Anika Man and because of the name Abhinavka, I thought it's someone who's probably like around our age but I then got to know that it someone from medieval India. It's a little unfortunate that in current times India we hear and study a little less when it comes to Abhinavka Gupta. The kind of work that he has done in terms of compiling all those ancient wisdom into books many many many many books is phenomenal. Yeah you may as well lead three four five six different podcasts for just covering the contribution of this person. Okay and he was a practice of trika. Yes yes we're going to open up this topic of trika now. Sure I would request you if it's okay with you. Some kind of mantra job before we begin whatever you're allowed to just so that we ensure it's not you and me speaking. Yes a gure bure a gure bure bure go to go to tare bure. Saravatansarvasarvabure. Namaste ture dure bure. Namaste ture dure. Namaste ture dure. Namaste ture. Namaste ture. Namaste. Namaste. Adesh. Okay now that we're joining you by our brothers. By the same cosmic force on this same cosmic energy. This is doing the listening is doing the asking is also doing my part. Okay and we begin by how it was introduced to you the first time. Interesting. So last October or September I'm in Kashmir. So there is this place in central Kashmir Valley called Birva. All right this is a distortion from the word Bhairva. Okay so and it's a very famous place by the way in Google it Birva it's called B-W-E-R-W-A-X right now and there is an ancient cave in one of these hillocks in that sub-district. As per the legends Abhirav Gupta goes inside this particular cave which have been unfortunate that that it is in this particular condition in the current times but I was very privileged I can say that I went to this particular cave at least more than three or four times was again privileged and blessed to sit down there and do some tapas. Some sadhana, some tapas. So I am there in Kashmir and this was the first time I stayed for over a month in the valley and then we had many interactions with a lot of different people different categories of people different layers of societies and I'm like I have been to this particular place at least two or three times and I am not happy with the way this whole facade is going around. There is a butcher house right in front of this particular divine gufa which is supposed to be Xeitra, Abhairav Xeitra and then there are waste management systems right in the rear of this particular cave. So there's a lot of unfortunate events which are just happening right at that particular place and we are doing a reiki we're trying to find out what else could have been there because now this is a very different age time and place. Twelve hundred years before that place would have been very different. The time would have been very different. Demography wouldn't have been the same right now and all in all I think about 300, 400, 80 all the way until almost 1300 to 1400 80. Kashmir basically was the land of Barah. It's still the land of Barah and fortunately there's a lot of energies which are kind of, if you know disintegrated it's not the way it should be like because of many many other factors. Sometimes the Vigra itself has been broken down in many many pieces. Sometimes the temple sometimes and there are places that have been myself and I felt wailing and crying of a lot of people as if there was a massacre, huge massacre there. There's a lot of places in Kashmir. Hurts but well that is how it is. So anyway so we're talking about this Barah Makiv. So we were actually meeting a lot of people and that is how one find day I'm sitting in one particular temple which is one of my favorite temples in Sri Nagar. And I happened to meet one of my Guruji's who I think in the first time that we saw each other I don't know if this would be right to say but love at first sight. You know an imprint. Guruji is shea love. Yeah I do know if it's okay. If there is a right word or right. Don't you like the listeners are evolved at this point so people are keeping up with me. Yeah I'm sure Bhagavati is working out her magic that way but I really don't have correct words to anyone like I was almost stunned for a few seconds. So that is how my first interaction or understanding of what Trika is itself. The deeper philosophy the 36 Tatwas, the stack etc. I mean I was I was jaw dropped. We were you know most of us UNI or 90% of the people who follow some of the other Sanatana philosophies they are mostly Vedantic at the oriented. Jeshri Ram I always say but the sort of nuances that Param Adwata or Trika has it's it's blinding. It's it's it's a different level. And you need a guru to guide you through it of course. I think most of the listeners at this point thanks to the last couple of years of a hold of Tantra based podcast are at the point of Namjap at least. Lots of people have started some kind of bear of Namjap or Devi oriented Namjap. At least that's begun. A lot of the listeners are intending to find the gurus at some point over the next couple of decades. So I think these podcasts are food for their soul. For everyone who is in the process of the Namjap the ones that light the mustard the eye every night go about the Namjap regularly. What's your message to them? Very short actually prepare yourself the guru my fists and the level of preparation that you have at any particular point of time. Please understand you're not going to find a super guru. Yoga only gonna get somebody who is going to teach you from where you are to the next level. The guru will change from this level to the next level also. So in my in a very layman terms I keep telling two people make your bowl Hindi may you say katora make your bowl that big. So you can accommodate as much because this is really much. It's too much. So sadhana or Namjap or everything on those lines you know basically is making you the right path row to receive everything which is around us. Did you have a phase of doing Namjap? Yes in fact I started with that run weird let me tell you a story if you are okay with that. Come on. This is when I decided to and I know it would be wrong if I say I decided to it was a different decision made by somebody else and I had to follow it. So I wrapped almost what we call life things attached with us almost in a backpack and did like everybody else used to do run to the Himalayas. You quit your job. I wasn't working then okay when I did this whole thing I had a I had a couple of restaurants when I wrapped everything up and this just happened very suddenly run weird I don't even know how why and all these things I don't have no answer. But I vividly remember that I was told or I had read it somewhere that before you do something of this sort you know you must take permission from your wife I didn't have one or your mother and father. Your parents right. So obviously being the son I'm closer to my mother. So we had a talk and my mother and I can talk on almost everything under the sun and I'm I'm like mother this is what I want to do. So usual regular mothers you see obviously how ever how much ever old you are she would still think of you as somebody who needs protection. Mothers are that way so yeah but cutting the long story short she was like let me come along with you I'm like no way so anyway this thing happens I'm in a rechercation I am calling one of my Guruji's again I'm like Guruji this is what I want to do and I'm in rechercation and I'm going to go on my foot all the way to Kedarnath from here and let's see where Bhagavati takes my journey to is there any particular suggestion or something that you would want when he's like yeah take this mantra keep going with it keep going with it without even counting how many number of times you're doing it I'm like okay what is it so this was this Mahamantra Harirama Harirama Harirama Harirama Hariray I can say this right now on camera because I don't do it anymore Haray Krishna Haray Krishna Haray Krishna Haray this is the Mahamantra a 16 letter Mahamantra and I'm like okay the Ticaguruji I will continue with this any number no fine so I started with this particular mantra since I left rechercation and almost 15 16 days in my journey in the deeper Himalayas I started to realize that you know just after two or three days this mantra was almost automatic in my head it is continuously ringing I'm going to eat I'm going to do anything you know where sometimes I also feel that this should not be running in my head right now it is not the time for this mantra right guilt a little bit I called by Guruji again I'm like you know what Guruji this is what is happening I'm taking a leak and at the same time I also want to stop it it is just not stopping which apparently had happened to be a really good thing you know a mantra is basically supposed to keep ringing and reeling in your head at one point of time unless that happens you are just doing Japat Apn Iranian Fatara curve so after some time it really happened with me in 3 four days which was very disturbing. I remember I used to cry because of the invaluable experiences that it got me through. Super excited as a kid, as if like a kid gets a new toy and wants to play around, wants to show almost every one of his friend, this is my new toy, right? something new happens to you in your life also that way which is not regular life. You also as a kid want to, you know what dad I got this, I don't know how to, so you get super excited about these things. And some things happen that you can't speak about on the podcast. Yeah, many. And I know I don't have to. Okay. But let's just say some facilities got unlocked. Uh, feckle t's yes. I'm sorry, faculties. Yes. It happens. I mean, at the same time that this mantra started, yes, chanting you is. Okay. Have you ever had this experience or in Viram going to ask you this question? Have you are almost thoughtless and you just don't know why the the tears are just coming out of your eyes continuously. You don't know how and you can't even stop. It happened in Kashmir actually. There's a Shiva temple in Gulmerk. Okay. Climbed up. Mm-hmm. Went inside. I did a mallage of. Yeah. And at the end of the mallage up, there was just tears rolling down but no sadness, no happiness. Yes. Just some release. Yes. These are, I mean, there are many many experiences one can talk about but well, these are supposed to be experienced. Ranbir, right? Not told. Everybody is going to have a very different experience and everybody should have different experiences like in our tradition, the trick or tradition, the way Guruji describes it at the 37th Tatwar in the 36th Tatwar. You don't have Paramstiva. What you don't have Paramstiva is beyond all these 36 Tatwas, right? So he manifests into the creation as himself wanting to experience himself in divinely uniquely ways possible. So if you and I were, if you and I are the same Shiva and if you are, I are very similar or indifferent, this would not solve the purpose of Shiva. You and I have to be different. That is how Shiva is experiencing himself through me the way I am, through you the way you are. It has to be very, very individual. So Shiva is like that is experiencing himself through many, many, many, bodies and manifestations. When we speak about Paramstiva, Paramstiva or Paramstiva or Paramhishnu, it is the Sanatana anyway of referencing the divine. What the West calls Omni-present God, we call Paramhramh Parashva, Paramhishnu depending on the path of Sanatana. Yes, you have chosen. All that speaks to you. Yes. You spoke about 36 Tatwas, up till the point of reaching Paramhishnu. Is Tatwas like levels? That was our level. But let's say structure, the very structure, this particular existence or this brahmand, this universe, or this existence itself, the one that we perceive is made of. But you said in Trikha there are 36 Tatwas before you reach Paramhiva. Yes. Yes. You mean the universe is made out of 36 Tatwas? Yes. Yes. So fire, water, air. These are the Mahapan Chibhutas. Very gross elements of the existence. The one that you can see, perceive, hear, taste and everything else. But these are the grossest elements. The Supreme or the subtlest element is Shiva itself. I would say Shiva and Shakti together make that particular element. And out of many, many wonderful manifestations of Shiva, the one which is very unique and very dear to myself also, is the Arthana Arishvara. I'm sure you know half a woman and half a man that is how it's represented. That is how the Paramthatwas, which is the 36 Tatwas as per the Trikha tradition, is undivided pure consciousness. That is the 36 Tatwas. So you're saying that there is the ultimate divine which is Paramhiva? Yes. Yes. That out puts Shakti in the first place, which is just the power of the realm that all realms. A little correction, Paramhiva is basically beyond all these 36 Tatwas. In the 36 Tatwas, when you enter the Tatwas game, the first and the most subtlest Tatwas that you can aspire to perhaps achieve in one of those lifetimes, is the Shiva Tatwas. You can never achieve Paramhiva. That is beyond these Tatwas. And then the Shakti, what we talk about basically is one which is the Vymersha in which the Shiva can manifest or can see its own reflection, can see its own knowledge. So that becomes basically Shakti. And then there are three different kinds of Shakties through which Shiva basically does the whole manifestation, whole creation and everything else. I mean it goes down to a lot of nittigrities, but Gyanashakti, remember, Xha and Kriashakti. These three are the major Shakties we got to remember. Kriashakti is the action, the power of action. Okay, knowledge that is Gyanah and Xha which is well and then comes down to Kriah which is power of action. We all have all these three Shakties by the way. You also do some Xha. We also do some desire. We all, these are all Xha's. Ourself are limited. Okay, why do you go out in the Himalayas for Yasadna? Number one, a little immaturity I guess. At one point of time you think that everything which is here in this Samsara is sort of binding you in a certain way. Be it your regular schedules, your work, your commitments. You want to shed all these things once and for all or for some time. So you can focus on a particular thing that is what Saginah means. Perhaps because of this I had to do that. I look back at it right now and I think I wonder why, but I don't even find the answer to why it happened to myself. I have no answer. Okay, how far have you gone into the Himalayas? Quite. Quite. Yeah. Like if I ask you about the furthest place that you've gone up till... Kidarthal. There are very few people who would even know about this place. Kidarthal. Yeah. And so it's about 17 odd kilometers from Gungothi. Yeah, there are very few people who actually even know about it and except for some trekking enthusiasts or Sadhus, nobody walks that route. I'm sure you meet other Sadhus as well. Yes. What are their stories? Different individual stories, but all inspiring stories in a way. You see, so I remember one of these conversations where I'm like Babaji, Hapay. There are so many people. I know there are maybe hundreds who are in the Bhagavas, but I know for sure that they're all not said the Prushas. Although I'm in Kungothi about 14,000 feet above the sea level, but there is a little bit of impurity here as well, acting here as well. How do they cope up with their own selves? I'm also seeking right now and I'm trying to also sort of collect little bites the information from Siddharthal Prushas like you. But they aren't even doing that and his answer still baffles me. I mean, it was like you tell me how many of these Sadhus, the one that you think are just acting, do you find in Rishikesh? Maybe in a few lakhs, right? But there are a few hundreds here in Gungothi. If they have to go all the way to Rishikesh or some other place like Chitra Koot, they would be making even more money than they are making here in Nungothi. Living in this particular harsh climate conditions atmosphere, topography and everything else, itself is a subconscious Sadhana that you are doing without even knowing. But they may be playing around with you, but at the same time they are also in Asadhana that they aren't aware of. Like I said just before, in there are certain places in Himalayas that you just go, you don't even have to do certain things and you know these energies or forces to sort of walk through you. You are just mesmerized as a regular human being. I'm like, yeah, there are so many experiences. What's the life of Asadhana like up there? What's a day in the life like? So I would narrate a few of the Sadhus as well as Sadhavis that I had met. Sure. Yeah. That's the moment up there as well. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. How much percentage? 20% of yes. Yeah. Let me talk about this Sadhavis that I'm talking about right now. From Karnataka almost 25 years in Gungothi, doing Sadhana, her daily life style is waking up at 3 3 13 in the morning, taking a shower that early, knitted the job, Pujadhana, everything else. But shower away. Right there is Gungadji. Okay. In the river. Yeah. And then all the way until 11, 11, 30 there would be busy with their medication, Dhanayana and rituals. And it's under the open sky or? In their cave. Okay. Yeah. It gets extremely cold and weird. So 11, 30, 12 o'clock they would get up after almost 8, 9 hours of Dhanayana and rituals, Prasadhana and everything else. Then they will feed some animals and birds about 2 or 3 o'clock that Prasadh they take it as food and what is the food? Very natural. Like Kichuri sometimes. Sometimes it could be just peanuts. Very normal things. But where are they getting the food for? So there is a small market right where the temple is. Okay. Which is open only for about 6 to 7 months in the entire year when the temple is open. After that everything is closed, they're operative. Go back down to their village. So yeah. The food is very, very simple. I remember surviving in Kichuri for months together. That is what you get to eat. Between 11, 30 to 2 o'clock she would finish off by offering the Prasadhana to the birds and animals around. Then she eats. Another couple of hour she shits in the temple in the long o'three comes back. Again, the Sajana starts. Sleeps at 11, 13. No food. So one food in the entire day, which is the Prasadh, which is after the offering of Devi, after the offering of Flora and Fauna and then she takes the Prasadh. This is just one Sajana and she's been doing this continuously from the last 25 years mind you and we this is not easy task. For anybody to continue with one particular practice, schedule a lifestyle dedicated for 20 years. Do they ever come down to the towns? Rarely. They don't like to. I remember myself. It just bogs you down. So this time when I had to come, when I was talking about how I had to fly from, Gangotri to Sri Nagar the first time around and I'm descending the mountains way before I could reach even a Rishikesh. A lot of hala blue going on all the time. You see, honking of the cars, people chatting, tests, etc. Everything is going on at normal lifestyle and it was too much for me to absorb because I was spending a lot of time in solitude. So it starts to bog you down, affect your equilibrium and I think it takes time for me to at least a week, 10 days to sort of get regular to things. Let's speak with the equilibrium a little bit because that level of Sajana, that time that's being dedicated to the meditation, to the rituals, of course it's changing your state of consciousness so for example that's Adri. I'm pretty sure again for lack of better words she is in bliss. Must be. Must be. That's how she's able to power through, I mean we're using the word power to, it's not powering to for she's enjoying her time there. Yes, right? Yes. That's the charm of that kind of life. You can't otherwise do these things relentlessly for 20 years. You got to be in that. Anandar. Have you met a Sado who claims to be much older than normal human years? I know him. I can't name him. I know a few people who have been there, at least have spoken with one, who has been alive from some time. Roughly how many years? Thousands. Thousands of years. So he's seen the British occupation of India. A lot. He's seen the blood. A lot. A lot more than that. What did you ask him? The one question which I was not supposed to ask him was his name. So I did not. But yes, regular conversation and I remember when I was talking to him, I was about to see him in a couple of months. So I sort of held back a lot of questions thinking I would want to to see him eye to eye while asking these questions. So it just happened. And well, we never met. But I remember very clearly talking to this gentleman. But you met him up there? Nope. Some way in the city. Yes. Yes. Why? Why is that? Yes. But of course, publicly never. No, of course not. He's living the life of a normal person. Yes. businessman. You never know. You see appearances are one of these qualities of Shiva is concealment. Concealment doesn't mean to hide, but to present yourself in many, many, many, many forms. For example, so much of information would be out in public that you would be confused. That is the way of distorting the truth. You don't hide it. You put it in the open. With so many other things, it's like finding something in the haystack. This sadhu was alive. Who is alive for more than a thousand years? What's his intention behind staying alive? I don't know if I should be putting this out in the, but so you know about the seven children GVs. Yes. That's all you want to say. Yeah. He didn't happen to have a shiny bead on his head, right? Do the sadhu's up in the Himalayas. I was speaking about the Kalki of Thar. I've never spoken with them about this. Do you speak to the gentleman and why is Ag about Kalki of Thar? Not really, but I have spoken with my Guruji extensively about him. Okay. His things are going to actually happen. But far away from our time. Well, timeline self really botched up the way we see time as, you know, a linear time or experience as, you know, linear past, present and future. It is not really like that. Kalki of Thar, apparently in most, I would rather not talk about it. Yeah. I've been asked by my Guru's to sort of keep it to myself. Okay. How do you feel when you come to Mumbai after speaking about the Himalayas in so much dating? It gets to me. I mean, quite literally, I, I like cities because it has a very energetic vibe, but it's too botched up. Yeah. Yeah. Too much confusion. Um, yeah. Right. So much of intermixing a lot of things going on at the same time, it becomes bizarre. Yeah. Yeah. Does he spoke up there in the Himalayas? Of course they do. Yeah. It's a part of a sad, though. Not every sad enough and not everybody does it. None of my Guruji actually endorsed to, uh, get on any sort of supplement for your sad, but there are some people up there who would still do it down here also. Why down here? Down here. Down here. It's everywhere. But are they doing it for sadhana? That's all. If they are not in there. So you think if one uses it for sadhana, it's a correct usage? I don't recommend anybody trying for any other sorts of substance use to get into sadhana because eventually one day or the other, if you are taking this as a walking stick, you would need that for all your life. So better start beginning it without being addicted or to it. Yeah. Or for its help, if I had this, I would have done better. Yeah. I think I'm a fan of keeping sobriety as one of the main themes during sadhana. Yeah. It is the sobriety helps a lot. The cleanliness helps a lot. I feel in your body is clean. It allows the sadhana to really act through your body. Enders my sense. Yes. Right. Yeah. I feel the same way about non-wetch. Yes. I mean, I know, I mean, I've had mentors, spiritual mentors who eat non-wetch themselves. They're doing all right. But I've just seen too many benefits by giving up on like meat. When did you seven years ago? What cause did you do that? Well, I kind of think I just shared it off just like I just couldn't eat chicken one. It just felt to it took some time to stop eating seafood probably a year after. After one even seafood didn't really taste the same as it did when I was growing up. So your story is very similar to mine run weird. All right, about seven, eight years back, I was standing at one butcher shop and I was into power lifting at one you look at me and you don't realize that I'm sure. But this is almost 10 years back. So as usual, you know, as your nutritionists and everybody will keep telling you as to what you got to eat, they start, etc, etc. You are an album guy, you know. So I was into heavy meat eating. I have three times chicken breasts, this, etc. You see? Yeah, same. But my meat and poultry shopping used to be from a super store. So you wouldn't see that animal being killed for your own taste. You just said chest in the bag. I just happened to experience that once and that was the last time I. Yeah. Yeah. I can never forget those pair of eyes of that goat. Yeah, I hear what you're saying. How do you feel the meat interacts with one sardhana? What depends on what sardhana you are there are sardhanas in sardhana that allow you to eat meat. Right? Shakshatanas. And you can, you can just, you can go to the peak of those sardhanas while you're an on vegetarian. Yes. Yes. But again, I feel this again very subjective, very personal. Yes. If your body is giving you signal to just stop eating meat, then listen to your body. Yeah. Right. Yeah. They always say listen to your gut feeling. Have you had a phase of better of a personal? Of some kind. As a complementary person, not to be the baby. Yes. Understood. At the start of your journey was a better person. Not really. Okay. Not really. In that cave, but I have had the baravai energy right in front of me, walking and talking right in front of me, feeling, you know that. Yeah. Yeah. You mean a bear of a peered and yes. Yes. Which bear? Um, call baravai. Okay. Yeah. You've had a meeting with Kalbair. Yes. Where was the Bangalore? Not once, not twice. See, when you talk about meeting, it can happen in many, many forms. You see, in a rupa, in without rupa, where just the smell was just the sight of, it could be a millisecond whoosh from from how you perceive it. And well, there are many, many ways. What stay do with you? I remember this call, asked me once, and it is almost midnight when my Guruji in his the gumbar of a star does the whole puja. What is the gumbar of a star? Bur desuut? Okay. Yeah. Barov. He doesn't wear clothes. So anyway, so I remember sitting down with my legs folded and doing my own japa. And all of a sudden, I'm touched by something really cold, like like a slab of ice. And I open my eyes and I see my Guruji at my feet. Can you imagine how that experience would be? Your revered guru comes to you, bound down to you, touching your feet and asking for blessings. I can never forget that sight and experience ever because I really had no idea what to do. Then he takes my both hands, put it on his head, takes my blessings and goes out for the rest of his puja. I have experienced Bhara in many, many, many ways. What was happening in that moment? The Bhara of energy was inside him. He was almost dead. When I say cold as an ice slab, yeah, it is a very different experience. It was a blessing for you. I can never forget that thing. In fact, I tried to ask and discuss this thing with him the next day. Because he keeps and observes more on those Kallashmis every time, every 15 days. So next day we are discussing the singing, Guruji, Guru Nathaji. That's how I... What was this all about? You know, you got me in a trap, I didn't know what to do, how to react. And well, then again, this is going to stay with me for quite some time because this answers were, you know, given me a different kind of perception as to how deep this thing can go. You see, he says that before you can become a guru, you got to be a very good student. Unless you are, you can never become a guru, Guru, self. But why was he touching your feet? He saw Guru in me. But the Bhara was in him. Yes. And the Bhara saw... When the Bhara sees you, he sees you as another Bhara. He doesn't see you as an viewer or you vraj or anybody else. It's all about the sight you have. And this is after a year of Bhara was a person of me. Yeah, of course. You know, when you grow on the path towards their divine, you attract higher beings and lower beings. Yes, you do. Right? Yes. Lower beings first. Lower beings first. Yes. How early? They're dying to get some energy. That is why they're in the lower realms. You mean pray, a lot. There are many, many. You can keep going down the rabbit hole. There are many, many entities right down there and up there as well. But because of the fact that these guys are negative entities, they keep craving for energy. If you are into spiritual sadhana or something on those lines, you basically are a crew in a lot of energy. So a few junk too, in a sense of creatures will also come around you like snakes. And a lot of these entities, you're also going to find probably coming close to you. And that is why when you're doing higher upasanas or or sadhanas, you basically use some sort of protection, cover gym. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You do all that. Okay. When was the first time you came across an entity? Many times. Was it after you met your guru? Many times. Many times even before that. Really? Yes. And why were they coming up to you? I have no idea. You talk about like teenage and childhood and not teenage teenage per se, but in my very adult consciousness, I remember at least a few times. Scary a little. Are you comfortable talking about it? Yes, I would be comfortable. I mean, it's not like it's going to get me into any trouble. But I think a lot of people actually do also call it a sleep paralysis. You see, when you are when you're down, you are in that semi, semi consciousness state. Your brain basically switches your body off. Yes. To protect the body is physical safety. But this is how your science will describe it to you. But the entities, there is no modern science, which is going to do all the description for those entities. And how you perceive and feel, it is dark for sure. So not very happy to experience or it's not like, I remember good experiences also in many, many, many, right? And I like I said, I miss some of those experiences because of my mistake. These experiences are not like something that you are looking forward to. Yeah, let's put it this way. So what was the early experience? One of them I can describe as feeling extremely helpless when we were. But what entity was it? Have no idea. It was male female. Can't say female. Most probably I would want to say that's how I had felt the energy, but can't be sure. I mean, it was not a human body body. So it wouldn't be no. You could see something. Yeah, just out of periphery of how a body looks like smoky. Great. Yeah. Yeah. And it interacted with you. Not verbally, but in the sense that you and I understand the talking, the telepathy suits. But obviously no words. Did it harm you in any? No, but feeling very helpless itself is a tacky feeling you don't want to be with. The harm is psychological. It's just the feeling of being helpless. Can't do anything about it. That feeling itself is a very weird feeling. It gets you into a, like, I don't want to experience that again. There are helpless feelings in divine experiences also, but you don't want them to end. They, even if that happens for a flick of a second, you would want, oh, you would look forward to have them. They aren't really. You know by your gut feeling. Have you seen beings in the Himalayas? Yes. Could other people see it? No, I was the only one in my cave that time. It was in a cave. Yes. A day of the? Yes. Okay. So yeah, this is something I can, I think I can remember about the nam japa that you were talking about and we were talking about it. Harairam. Harairam. Harairam. This is the Maham mantra. All right. So apart from other practices that I was initiated into, when I wasn't going to go three, I also continued doing my mantra job. And by then it had come down to 16 Mahalas every day. All right. So early in the morning, because of the fact that it is your body, your biological clock actually starts to work in a particular way that you get up at three. I at least used to get a a bit 330 max. And then do my morning things and sit down for for your japa. So after a couple of hours when the thing is over, I am, I could sense that there is somebody sitting right, adjacent to me. I could feel it. I opened my eyes and I for at least I think a couple of seconds, I could see a huge figure. I don't want to take because of the fact that I was doing the ramjapa. Think in your head, who would have been sitting right next to me? I think he's sitting next to you. Yes. Okay. What an experience it was. Yeah. These things you can never ever take off your they go with you. Can I say it out loud? Please. What did it feel like sensing Hanumanji that closely? Honestly speaking that day I had trouble deciphering as to was it really? Phone call Guruji something like this happened early in the morning today. And he clearly without asking me any question. Yeah, this was this. I'm like, I never thought of it this way, but it was there was an inkling of that sort. Yeah, but right at that moment I was not scared. I was it was a blissful feeling. Yeah, nothing more than that. Gangotri is a very mysterious place. You brought up Gangotri a lot. A lot. I mean, I to my very close people, I say that if I was born twice, that is where my room is. I mean, I know that the Gangotri is the glacial. How do you even phrase this grammatically? Gangotri is where the temple is right now from where it is said River Ganga becomes Ganga. All right. Now this glacier that you talk about basically is the Gomuk Glacier, which is about another 18 kilometers above. Okay. Gangotri. So you go all the way hiking a couple of days. You've gone. Yeah. You've seen the origin point of the river. What does it look like? Well, well, technically it is not even the original or origin point of Gangotri. Ganga actually comes from the glacier in the mountains of Tibet. It just appears to us as it's coming out from a particular cave because before that it is underground. Understood. Yeah. So it basically comes out from from what I understand Lake Mansa over. And physically it appears to us that it's coming out as a stream from that particular cave. Wow. Yeah. What does it feel like at the Gomuk? You know, it is it is all of wonderful experience. There is it would be very kiddish for me to even put it down in words. You are just in bliss. You want to Tibet? No. Okay. Not in at least a physical body. Bangalore is also pretty blessed city. I mean, actually, let's not put it down city wise as well. This Bharat Bhukhanda itself is like my Guruji says, a lot of people would keep telling you this is the divine land, Holy Land. This statue may have heard about these faces. This is the Holy Land man. Where else would you have Shakti herself been cut down into 56 pieces and still underground? Lives inside this bumi. No where else you have Shakti pitas. We have live Jagrith, Shakti pitas and Shakti the grid of Shakti here in Bharat. At least the continental Bharat. Yes. What the geographical political map of Bharat today? Okay. Gosh. There are Shakti pitas in Pakistan of Ganesan. They're Bangladesh, Myanmar, Bhutan. There are many many Shakti pitas all across. Are they still functional if that's the? There is one famous one Ranvir. I'm sure you may know a little bit more about me on this Hingla, Martha Temple in Pakistan. This is in Balochistan by the way. And it is still life. There are many Balochis who have converted or changed their faith to Islam right now. But there are many many people who are actually keeping the whole traditional life as well as they are the caretakers of the temple as well. Isn't it fantastic? But I think that is what Bhakvati wishes keep it alive. Okay. Okay. Let's talk about a bhura and kapalikas. What is a kapalikas, Arbhu? Kapalikas comes out of this word called Kapalu which is your skull. Kapalikas, Agoras and all these there are there are many other forms of sects or ways people follow to reach Shiva. They are all under the umbrella of Shiva. Shavachara as they call in the Tantra terminology. So I remember my Guruji used to say Khi we are in the Natha Parampara and all the gharis and Kapalikas, they come under our umbrella but we necessarily don't belong to Kapalikas or Agoras Ampradayamir. I mean I have had some very healthy interactions with Agoris, some from Banares, some really good ones. You would never look at them and think even once they could be a gharis in their earlier. I mean general regular people like you and I but I know their energies. I mean you can just feel it. These things can't be described in words, Rambir. You have to really sit in front of them to feel that energy the way I'm sitting in front of you I'm feeling yours and then you would never be able to tell and describe them in perfect words as to how it felt like. It is a very different aura around them. At least the few that I have met in my life. You've met a siddhapurosh? Many. Many. Siddhapurosh? What do you again? Before you ask your question, very calculatively think about who and who do we call a siddhapurosh? What does it mean by siddhapurosh? Or siddhapurosh? Why keep it gender specific? Right? But who is a siddhapurosh? Complete. The deity resides inside the pussy. Master. It's our Sanatani version of the enlightened one. Not really. I would not agree with it. From my very humble understanding, Rambir. I think it we very lightly talk about this word called enlightenment. What incense again is enlightenment means you are flooded with light. What is light? Don't we just say in every other religion that the supreme consciousness or the God up there, the absolute reality is made of light. Even in our own tradition, we say Shiva as Prakasha and Shakti as Vimarsha. So it's a Prakash Vimarsha. That means that you are flooded with light. Not every time that you get a particular city, you get that enlightenment. You get that mastery over that particular thing. Does that mean you are enlightened? No, you are a little more advanced in mastering those subtler aspects of life. Have you seen a showcase of siddhis? Yeah. This is how you light you are sacred. I think it did that to me as well because after that incident when I go back to my ashram and we are talking about it. So Guru Nathaji, this was, you know, wasn't it fascinating and then there are other things that we were also talking about and this is right. He's like, yes. Of course it is fascinating. But is your goal just fascinating? If it is then yeah, go ahead. But if it is not, then there are so many other mastery that you can actually, but this is again, drifting you from the goal of why you've really started the whole thing. I can maybe earn a few bucks or impress you by lighting my cigarette like this, but more than that, I don't think this is really useful. We have 10 rupees lighter, we can buy we don't have to spend like a few years together to get this city. Does one lose something every time they showcase this? From my own experience again when we I thought and I know for sure that showcasing anything without of your ego actually destroys your your tapas, your sadhana or your energy that you have accrued from some time. It is never good to do that. If you have something this will be again as your prarabha or as the cosmic wish or will that it will come use to somebody else. But you do it because you want to show it off. Are you a sadhak? Back to the land of the Sadehks when we're talking about Gangotri and the Himalayas in general and all the locations where the Sadehas lived together for lack of better words. The low beings make their way up there as well. I have been told when we that specially places like Kedarnath and Gangotri, these two places are bereft of any lower beings or or negative entities. I have never experienced it myself any which way is going to flow through that. I mean it is figuratively at least supposed to take all the negativity away from where it flows. Doesn't it carry all the dirt? It cleans us from our own dirt. I don't think there's anything dirty which is there and I never felt it. Higher beings yes. Yes. I mean Bhakwati has been very very kind. Have you ever pondered upon your last birth? Pondered? I don't know about my last but at least one of these birds I foresaw know. I know. Some are known. Yes. You're just carrying the bait involved in this birth. Everybody is. Are you trying to make this your final birth? Not really. You're just carrying on the side. Yeah. See the end game is to get free from the the circle of karma and reaction. How it comes back in your life in some other way? This life or other. If you really want to focus on this then you detach yourself from every other karma that you do. You're doing a podcast great but if you are you're doing it because of the passion or you really like to do it that's is you've got feeling you keep doing it. But as soon as you start to attach something else to what you do concurrently then it starts to accrue that karma and every karma is going to have the karma fall. As long as you are in this particular cycle you will keep coming to the same stage because there is some desire which is still unfulfilled and you're going to try to come back to the stage and perform that role. So this thing is going to keep like Vishnu. He is unfortunately or fortunately for whatever reason. He is bound by his own watch and every time something bad happens in Prithviloka he has to. He's bound by his own he comes down he has to come down. Does those things? So the goal is to get free from your karma and karma fall. Have you interacted with any wild animals while you're hiking up there in the hills? Trees trees that have seen a lot. Yes, yes stones. I remember very clearly again this stone at the Everest base camp which had a very different energy. I mean I could just hug that stone for minutes together. I'm not going to say hours because staying there for a few minutes itself is like dine almost every day. Every time but this stone was very different. Gedarnath that stone is very different. Nothing is not Shiva. Sometimes when you're traveling in the hills you'll reach these spots that just feel a lot more divine than normal and you'll probably see a large stone in those spots and you might be drawn to one of those stones. Yes. And then if you truly look at it closely you realize that that stone is probably seen the dinosaurs as well. Yeah. If you think that deep, yes you would. It's about the perception run wheel. You may as well feel that death when you're looking at the particular stone. I may feel it in a different way. Somebody else may as well see. I mean it's the perception that makes how real it feels to you and what it makes you feel like. Do you want to talk about the Naga Zhato? Naga culture still surviving. I've never heard the two words together. Kashmir is they call the land of Nagas. If you still open the map of Kashmir, the political map you'll see how many cities are still named as their suffix Arnaga. Anantanag have you heard? Very Naga have you heard? These are very popular cities in Kashmir. They have a huge, I mean as per the legends. Kashmir at one point of time was the city, was the place of Nagas. In that particular lake which at in the ancient times was called Satissar, what are Nagas? I got two answers for your envious. All right. One, obviously you know what I'm going to talk about. Nagas are some beings which are way more advanced than homo sapiens. At one point of time they're also flourishing on this particular planet. They still are. You and I can't probably reach out to them. Let's put it this way. You and I can't even reach out to let's say Donald from right now. Yeah? Or blue whales. Blue whales. Or us? Lots. You see you. You and I have access to limited things and we don't have access to those beings right now. Currently in this form. But if you want to invoke them, yes. Like, yeah, you can. Second are Nagas which are the human tribes who have learned enough from those ancient beings and you know started to sort of develop a cult became a civilization later down the line and they followed a lot from their from their so-called divine beings. So they become a tribe and become a civilization. Kashmir has been like that. A lot of influence from Nagaculture before I would say the Yagga and rituals and Vedic, Tujayan, other deities start to infiltrate into the Kashmir Valley which is about seven, eight thousand, years back. So Kashmir has a huge Nagga cult. I have a lot of shatty friends. Lot of kinetic governments. They all take then Nagapuja as very seriously and I know for a fact that in the southern part of our country, Nagabership is still relevant, popular. It's popular to the extent where most families will do it if they are Sanatri. We've heard of Nagal land. Yes. And even names have power. There's got to be some connection there. Yes. Right. Nagal land is mostly a tribal culture. I also know that the tribal forms of tantra also extremely powerful. Yes, because they are less corrupted. Hmm. Yeah. The lineage actually is less unbroken in the tribal cultures. Yeah. You know, you spoke about the human tribes that have adopted Nagagal culture. Yes. I'm sure Nagal land was a part of that could be. Possibly could be. Okay. But let's talk about Kashmir. So you're seeing there are indigenous Kashmiri tribes that have learned from the Nagas and are still practicing? Yes. I mean, those indigenous Kashmiri tribes that you talk about are the people of Kashmir today. I mean, just as thousands and thousands of years of you know, evolution into what they have become today, despite changing their faith systems or rituals or something, there's still a reminiscence of something from the ancient Nagagal culture, even in today's life, the way the Kashmiri woman or Kashmiri woman would braid her hair, check that out. It's fantastic. The way a lot of that thing is still surviving and you can see that in regular lifestyle of Kashmiris. Yeah. I mean, what does generations of Nagagal worship do to people? You know, this is something I'm personal. Personally sharing this thing with you. I used to wonder, we spoke of perception as to how we see the world. Right. What would a Naga perception be? Imagine yourself being a snake. Would you see Ranveer the way I look at it? You would be a whole different entity to me. And this whole room will be very different if I look at it from a Kaksai. Let's say. So when you talk about any particular animal, let's say Naga in this particular sense, you know, imagine yourself being so close to that particular animal that you imbibe their qualities and attributes, which is what, which is the senses, the Naga senses. In terms of vision, in terms of intuition, in terms of being, you know, in solitude. But when we talk about Naga practice, this is also mantra based. I wouldn't know if there were mantras back then. Mantras come from Vedas and Agmas. Right. But this is from again from my very limited and humble understanding of how things were in the historic Kashmir. This is predating all these things. The Naga worship that happens in Karnataka. I believe that centered around mantras, but maybe the mantras that they developed only encapsulated the same energy, which was being utilized in the times that preceded the time of mantras. Yeah, you're right, actually. It's the same way with the, you know, all the Vedic rituals. You see a lot of Vedic rituals that we do today, like even the Pranaprathistha is a tantric practice, which is done in a Vedic way. It's just that the mantras are encoded versions of bags of energy. There are other ways to get to those bags of energy, but mantras are what the modern humans and other they might get understand. I would say slightly different. Let's understand mantras as the manifestations of the similar Devta in the energy form of was sound. That's their energy body in terms of sound. Let's put it this way. Devta is the mantra. Yes. As a suggestion and they also keep saying, yes, we spoke about the Nagas still being one old. Yes. They still do. Yes. Do you think they have interactions with the snakes that we see around? Yes. There is some connection between the snakes. Yes. Not talking talking, but or hi, hello, how are you doing sweetie, but in their own very subtle energy forms. Have you ever, this is a question I hope you don't mind me asking, but when you are in your well, do you when you sit down for your sadhana or if you have been through any Anushthana, have you encountered a reptilian around ever? Lots of lizards. Lizards because you're doing it in a protected city environment, I guess. Yes. That's why. Yeah. But almost all the times when you're sitting for a long hours and when you have a certain upsurge of energy inside you, you will definitely find a reptilian just around. Definitely. If you're ice closed, you would still sense it. Otherwise, there will be around. You just name anybody. You mean like a snake? Yes. You mean anything other than a snake? No, reptilian means a snake. Most in most cases will be a who did snake, a cobra, but a snake for sure. I am at one point of time was not scared, but unlike we are urban people, right? We don't, we're not accustomed to seeing snakes and things in our flats or apartments. So I used to be like, hmm, at one point of time, but slowly and gradually as in when you're sadhana and your time that you invest in your sadhana increases, your energy levels or also, you know, at a high, I think you slowly and gradually start to build that connection with the reptilians also some way that that feel or that that animosity, it just dies off. There is a snake inside you also and inside all of us, you know what I'm talking about, right? Couldn't believe yes. Slowly and gradually you will become if not friendly, but that animosity is definitely going to die off if you are progressing in your sadhana, but a snake, especially a who did one will always be around if you are in your deepest of meditation, or if you are doing something which is ritualistic nature, but they will be around for sure. To protect you. Yes. Also to feed on from the energy that you generate. Because even they are evolving. Yes. Everybody has to, everything is just Shiva like we spoke in the beginning and everything which it's got which is sentient is trying to go back to the same source. So evolution is a defacto thing for almost everything which is sentient. It is growing from whatever level it is to the next milestone. I think that's the end of the podcast. Always listen to your gut feeling fully blank. There's nothing. There's nothing left. Great talking to you man. Thank you. I appreciate it. You know, I appreciate that. Before this podcast began, I was meditating to kind of re-energize myself at a very elaborate shoot in the morning as well. It's got an intuition that this particular shoot is coming as a blessing to the channel. So that's what I'm flowing with. May back with you be kind to almost everyone who are present here. Yeah. So thank you. Appreciate it, my man. And don't remember me calling you, my man. That was the episode for today ladies and gentlemen. We link your Rajvai's and also down below. Please go check them out. Always looking for more guests related to mantra oriented topics. So send in your guest suggestions and until next time guys,"}