{"Episode Name": "Soundtracks of our lives", "Podcast Name": "TED Radio Hour", "Episode Link": "https://www.npr.org/2025/02/21/1232862566/soundtracks-of-our-lives", "duration": "2978", "text": " This message comes from Capital One. Say hello to stress-free subscription management. Easily track, block, or cancel recurring charges right from the Capital One mobile app. Simple as that. Learn more at capital one.com slash subscriptions, terms and conditions apply. This is the Ted Radio Hour. Each week, groundbreaking Ted Talks. Our job now is to dream big. Delivered at Ted conferences to bring about the future we want to see around the world. To understand who we are. From those talks, we bring you speakers and ideas that will surprise you. You just don't know what you're going to find. Challenge you. We try to have to ask ourselves like, why is it noteworthy? And even change you. I literally feel like I'm a different person. Yes. Do you feel that way? Ideas worth spreading. From Ted and NPR. I'm Manu Shzamirody. On the show today, the soundtracks of our lives. If you are one of the millions of people who saw the movie Wicked This Winter, you'll remember the opening lines to the iconic song Defying Gravity. Something has changed within me. It's kind of mysterious. Suspenseful. You can tell the song is going to build and build. I'm so with playing by. It's so beautiful and it is absolute the most wonderful match between lyric and melody. I believe that something has changed because of that big leap. Something has changed. So I'm like, oh, tell me more. This is musician Scarlett Tees. She's a professor at Berkeley College of Music where she teaches the art of songwriting. And why a song can make us feel something powerful and emotional. Often she says our favorite songs are defined by small and deliberate choices that composers make like a key change or a leap in octave. So in Defying Gravity, there's this moment where the composer wrote unlimited. I'm unlimited, right? And so the dada-dada-dada-up high limit. That's the limit. Big open wide, right? So up that big octave. So kind of the craft of songwriting is when you create a big leap, a big distance between notes. It creates a hook and it creates something really memorable. So going up eight notes. And we've heard that in somewhere the way along. So he included that little easter egg from the Wizard of Oz in Wicked, which was so beautiful and vast. And so that's a word that we borrow from poetry and we call that prosody where everything you're doing melodically, harmonically, rhythmically is all in support of the story being told. Scarlett has taught many musicians over the years. Some of her former students include Charlie Puth and Lizzie McAlpine, artists with billions of streams on Spotify. And she often encourages her students to start writing by tapping into their deepest feelings. What is the thing you care the most about right now? What is the thing that keeps you up at night? What's the thing you can't stop thinking about? As songwriters, we are repurposing these human tropes into new language. For the listener mainly to understand their life in a new viewpoint with new words with new music over and over again. That's the secret to songwriting. How am I feeling what music feels like that? Hmm, I want you to empathize with me. I want you to understand me and all of that is in a song. Are you singing it on the downbeat? Are you singing it off the beat? Are you singing something stable? Are you singing something unstable? You want the listener to feel what you're feeling. Music is always for me. It's always an emotional response. It can really change the weather instantly in my body, in my mood. It's just it's soothing and it's comforting. And for some people that's heavy metal and for some people that's classical and for some people that's country, it's all about what you love. From our favorite music to our own voice, we are surrounded by sound all day long. But what do we actually absorb? And what do we just filter out? How does all this noise affect our emotions and behaviors? Today on the show, the soundtracks of our lives. A musician, technologist and voice expert explain how what we hear shapes us. So back to Scarlett Keys. In her classes, she coaches students on the techniques they can use to grab a listener. Here she is explaining more from the Ted stage. One of the tools we use is tone. That's something we all understand, tone. Imagine you're sitting in a cold hospital room waiting to meet your doctor, wearing nothing but your underwear beneath your dignity gown. And your doctor comes in. Nobody wants to hear, hello, my name is Dr. Watson and I'm your brain surgeon. We want to hear, hello, my name is Dr. Watson and I am your brain surgeon. Because when his tone of voice goes up, so does your heart rate. And when his tone of voice goes down, you feel calm and I'm in good hands. So tone of voice matters. So think of melody as the song's tone of voice. What we say is oftentimes more important than what we say. As Western listeners, we have a relationship to melody and we have an expectation to that relationship. So I'm going to play something and when I stop playing, I want you to tell me what you expect me to play next. There it is. Exactly. So some notes feel stable and some notes feel more unstable, begging for resolution and that's very powerful information for a songwriter to know. The words we place on those notes make the listener feel certain things. I'd like to take a moment to ruin an Adele song. I'm sure you've all heard her song, someone like you. In the verse and in the pre-chorus, she runs into her ex unexpectedly and she's clearly still in love. Okay, you know the song. What if it, what if she had sung it like this? What if she had sung it like this? Never mind of someone like you. What happened? I apologize, by the way. In my version, we believe her. We believe she will find someone like you. No problem. There's plenty of you out there because I have paired stable notes in the key and stable chords, bringing a feeling of stability. But that's not the melody she's saying. Those weren't the tones that she's saying. This is her version. Never mind of find someone like you. Do you feel the difference? In her version, we know she will never find anyone like you. We know that because she has paired unstable pitches to match the way she's feeling, building empathy with the audience. Go Adele. You use a couple of examples in your TED Talk of musicians, singer, songwriters who do an amazing job of signaling emotion. What is it that these people do that, that not only connects while you're listening to the song, but makes you want to listen to it over and over again? I mean, I think there's a lot of things that go into a good song. And one of the things that I learned was to really pay attention to symmetry. You know, if everything is expected and everything, all the lines are the same links, all of the sections are the same number of lines, it gets a little boring. So just surprising our listener. Number one is a really great thing to do. There's another thing I talk about and it's like if people are having a day when they're not feeling really inspired, they're not downloading the muse. I'm like, hold on, just play with shapes. There's a lady Gaga song. If you were to sketch out the first line of her melody, it would look like a straight line. That's pretty boring, but it's effective. And so here's her lyric. You give me a million reasons to let you go. You give me a million reasons to quit the show. So that's like a static flat melody with mostly. I think it's about 13 to 15 notes of repetition. I kind of love it though. I don't know why. Why? Well because it feels like she's defeated. Like, oh, I have given you a million reasons. It feels defeated and exhausted. I've had it with you. She could have moved it a little bit. Or thirds. Or wider. No, it was perfect. So sometimes with all of the creative people on my K, try a, try a melody that kind of repeats a lot. Just see what happens there. Songs help us process emotion and understand how we feel. Pick a song in the morning to start your day with instead of the usual negative thought train that blazes through your brain taking you with it. Put on a song you love that has uplifting lyrics that primes your nervous system for a great day. Or the next time you have questionable in-laws coming over. Instead of awkward silences and small talk, put on a song you know they love and let the dopamine flow. I mean I think we all Spotify and all these different apps that we make it easier to make playlists and find the music that we like and discover new music too. But you have been a real believer in curating the soundtrack of our own lives. Tell me how that you started thinking about that and why you think that's important. Well so three years ago I was diagnosed with breast cancer and I really had to turn back and look at music and go I'm sorry music that I've analyzed you so much because now I really need you and I have forgotten you as medicine. And I had to go through chemotherapy and I would say to friend send me your best song. Send me your you know and on the way to chemotherapy I would have a song in the car and it would be a friend would send me hey I've got one Bill Withers lovely day. I mean there's so much that happens to us when we listen to music that has been official. It boosts our immune system. This is the science that has come out over the past 10 years and the effects of music on our health. So this thing that that had saved my life over and over and again saved my emotional life saved my everything. It was now I was returning to that in a way that I hadn't before. Even when we're tired of sound we need at least to go to music a couple times a week in an or a day even and just put on one song one song it will change your biology. It's a wonderful thing and when you wake up in the morning instead of waking up with the same thoughts that we had yesterday you could wake up and say I've got my mornings on. I'm going to put my morning song on. It's just a great way to start the day. That was songwriter Scarlett Keys. Her memoir is called What If It All Goes Right and you can see her full talk at Ted.com On the show today the soundtracks of our lives. Oh yeah. I'm Manusz, I'm Marody and you're listening to the Ted Radio Hour from NPR. Stay with us. This message comes from Charles Schwab. When it comes to managing your wealth Schwab gives you more choices like full service wealth management and advice when you need it. You can also invest on your own and trade on think or swim. Visit Schwab.com to learn more. This message comes from Capital One with the venture X card earn unlimited double miles on everything you buy. Plus get premium benefits at a collection of hotels when booking through Capital One travel. What's in your wallet? Terms apply details at capital one.com. This message comes from Charles Schwab. When it comes to managing your wealth Schwab gives you more choices like full service wealth management and advice when you need it. You can also invest on your own and trade on think or swim. Visit Schwab.com to learn more. This message comes from ADP. ADP knows any new technology, any old competitor, any trendy thing. Even a trendy thing that everyone knows isn't a great idea but management just wants us to give it a try for a bit can change the world of work. So whether it's a last-minute policy change or adding a new company holiday ADP designs forward thinking solutions to help businesses take on the next anything ADP always designing for people. It's the Ted Radio Hour from NPR I'm Manusz Zumorody and on the show today the soundtracks of our lives. Over the past 100 years technology has had a profound impact on how we listen to music from records and radio stations to cassette tapes and CDs to mp3 players and streaming. But now with artificial intelligence technology is shaping the music itself. We're right on the cusp of a chagit p.t. moment. This is Pierre Baro where you can generate music and you can generate really good music that's really personalized to your taste. Today he is a pioneer in AI generated music but Pierre first started thinking about all this back in 2013 as a university student studying computer science by day playing music and watching movies at night. So at the time I was in my third year of university and I remember very vividly that I was often jamming on my piano especially at midnight or odd hours of the morning and then one day I sort of stumbled upon this science fiction film called her welcome to the world's first artificially intelligent operating system. If you haven't seen her it's an indie science fiction sort of romance starring what keep Phoenix. Who gets close to a super intelligent AI. I gave it to myself actually voiced by Scarlett Johansson. I'll come because I like the sound of it. And there's this one scene that really jumped out at Pierre. One day they share this this moment together and the outdoor the main protagonist asks Samantha what are you doing? What are you doing? And Samantha replies. I'm just looking at the world and writing a new piano piece. Oh yeah can I hear it? And she starts playing this very beautiful piece of piano. Being sort of thinking and writing this piece of music for for this moment since we cannot take a photograph together. Well I was thinking we don't really have any photographs of us and and I thought that I would call it the musical photograph. Captures us he is limited in lives together. For Pierre as a musician and a computer science major. I like her photograph. This was his aha moment. I heard this and I was immediately hooked. Unlike a lot of science fiction movie previously it pictured a very positive view of what AI could be in the future. Could create these musical photographs that would inspire people that would capture a shared moment. And so I just started thinking a little bit obsessively about what was the state of the art of AI and how I could achieve this dream of creating a musical photograph. And so over the next three years Pierre built an early AI generated music composition tool and made it open to the public. He called it Eva. Eva was trained on scores some 30,000 pieces of classical music. It learned to emulate all sorts of composer styles, moods, themes and tempos of different musical eras. The goal was to generate music that perfectly fit whatever a person wanted to hear. For Eva this process is taken from years and years of learning decades of learning as an artist as a musician and composer down to a couple of hours. Two years after launching Eva in 2018 Pierre went on the Ted stage to demonstrate what it could do. For example we were commissioned to create a piece that would be reminiscent of a science fiction soundtrack and the piece that was created is called Among the Stars. And it was recorded with a CMG orchestra in Hollywood and the great conductor John Neil and this is what they recorded. For me this piece of music is the first embodiment of what it means to create personalized soundtracks for people. And so it's a very meaningful piece of music for me. How did people first respond to the launch of Eva? What did people think? So there was a lot of different responses. And as you can imagine, there was something like this. There was both extremely positive and of course extremely negative for very obvious reasons. Well it was spelled out those obvious reasons for it. Because maybe someone listening is like what? This sounds amazing. Fair enough. Well there's of course going to be concerned about how the technology is going to be used. Is it going to be used to replace humans or is it going to be used to empower humans? From the very beginning we've had to wrestle with these questions and explain to people that the value of this technology was not to replace creators and just have a computer create music going forward but instead to create tools for people to be able to create music to bring down the barriers at entry for creating music. This is like a new technology just like before. The synthesizer was invented or the digital audio workstation was invented and this kind of technology has helped historically humans and this is just the next iteration of that. Just maybe a little bit more powerful. There was one example that I read that really struck me that explained the shift that's happening. I read one hit maker. He compared AI to the introduction of drum machines in the 80s that like suddenly anything could have a beat and professional drummers needed to learn how to use the technology to stay relevant. Do you find that useful that comparison? Yeah I think that's a fair comparison and for those people who maybe are a bit more skeptical or scared I think it's important to also notice that all music today is not just made with drum machines. There's still plenty of music that's made with live drummers so I think that's a good showcase that technology expands the realm of possible but it doesn't mean that everything that came before all of a sudden becomes obsolete. Today the tools to generate music with AI are much more advanced. For one thing they're not trained on written scores anymore. The tools analyze songs themselves looking for patterns and then producing their own versions in a matter of minutes. For example my producer James used another AI tool called Udo to make this ridiculous new Ted Radio Hour theme song. synth prop tune straight from the 80s or with a few more mouse clicks he can transform the song into a James Brown-esque. First of all which one did you like better? I have to ask you here. Were you more for the like synth patch up voice sound or were you more sort of deep soul? Deep soul? Yeah for sure. I don't know it just has a radio vibe that is uncanny almost. I mean as amazing as those sound kind of silly. There's a more serious issue here and that's the debate over these AI's being trained on copyrighted music. You have made clear to people that Ava is not trained on copyrighted music but in 2024 the recording industry association of America sued a couple AI music companies for copyright infringement. I mean the makers of chat GPT trained it by scanning the entire internet under what they claim is fair use. Do you think training AI with music should be considered fair use? Well I think that you know like it's important to have like space for innovation and it's also important at some point to recognize that okay maybe you know even if it's authorized or legal to do something it doesn't mean that there's no grounds to sort of rethink how business models and incentive mechanisms are put in place to to reward all the actors of an ecosystem. I think that AI companies like ours and others should have a right to train on data but it doesn't mean that we're not willing to to work with others you know to make sure that going forward this technology works for everyone. I mean we're talking about entering an entirely new era of I mean I hate to use the word but content creation. I guess some people worry about originality if we are making things based on something that's already been made where's the human strangeness in all of that? I think that's a fair question but perhaps what this question misses is the fact that at least in my opinion is not going to be used for use cases that say human-made music is going to be used for. So for example I don't think that you know we're all going to listen to only AI music on Spotify going forward. I think that's not really the point. However I think that there's new use cases for the type of tools that we and others are building. For example one is music education. So we see a lot of people using Ava to understand how music is created. So music schools are using it to to train students on how to create certain type of music that maybe they're not as comfortable creating. Another example is creating interactive music for interactive media like video games. I think that's not something that's scalable with human-made music. So there's all these other use cases that are not to currently explore or as optimized for human created music that AI music is perfect for and it is not going to necessarily compete against human music. And that brings us back to the original idea you had this idea of crafting a soundtrack to fit your day not just by building a playlist but by really scoring music to your life. So I'm a huge listener of music. I listen to probably I don't know three to four hours of music every day. I mean especially as a programmer I think lots of programmers tend to listen to music while they work. Helps magnifies certain emotions or sort of things that are happening throughout my life. And so there was an opportunity to really get to the next level of that and soundtrack everybody's life and everybody's personal moments with music and get people engaging in music in completely novel ways essentially. If you personalize music to that extent I think you can really get more people excited about creating music and essentially turn everyone into a creator. That was Pierre Baro. He is the CEO and co-founder of Eva. You can watch his full talk at 10.com. On the show today the soundtracks of our lives. So we've talked a lot about music but really almost all the time what we hear are voices like me on my way to the studio. Welcome to NYC now. I've got my earbuds in. Your source for local news in. Got my dog with me. Okay let's cross let's cross. Quick, quick, quick. On the way I'll stop for coffee. All right so thank you so much. Listen to the busy street. But by the time I sit down to my microphone I'm often reminded that the voice I hear the most. Okay I am sorry. My own. Most of us use our voice on a daily basis but have no idea how it works. And even scientists who've been researching it for a long time there's still a lot of mystery. This is Rebecca Kleinbergier. She is a professor of Humanics and Voice Technology at Northeastern University. And much of her research focuses on the relationship we have to our own voice. What it sounds like to us and how we think it comes across to others. All of us have some sort of relationship with our voice. And although it's extremely familiar we also very much estranged from our own voice. But our voice is with us constantly. How do you see it? Well you can kind of think about the voice as a gift you give to others. Your voice is not meant for you to listen to it. There's a lot of different reason within our own body. The reason of how we walk. The reason of our own heartbeat and our own breathing. And similarly as a voice all of that as some of the temples in our lives there are metronomes of our lives. But we are not conscious of them. So you could think of your voice as part of the background ambient music of your life. Rebecca calls the voice we hear in our heads the inward voice. And she says there are mechanisms that explain why we hear that voice as a quieter filtered version of the outward voice we project onto the world. Why isn't that we are so unfamiliar with it? Why isn't that it's not the voice that we hear? Here is Rebecca Kleinbergier on the TED stage. So let's think about it. Let's write on the mechanism of perception of this inward voice. Because your body has many ways of filtering it differently from the outward voice. So to perceive this voice it first has to travel to your ears. And your outward voice travels through the air while your inward voice travels through your bones. This is called bone conduction. And because of this your inward voice is going to sound in a lower register and also more musically, more than your outward voice. Once it travels there it has to access to your inner ear. And there is a sudden mechanism taking place here. It's a mechanical filter. It's a little partition that comes and protects your inner ear each time you produce the sound. So when you do open your mouse you also dampen a little bit the sound that's going to enter from your ear. We know that interestingly from studies of frogs. Some of those frogs are extremely loud. So loud that really at the source of them they should almost be deafened by their own sound. And we sort of realize that when those frogs make those sound there is almost a little wall that comes and protects their inner ear. And I wonder if other species have that. And yes a lot of species actually have that even humans. So that also reduces what you hear. And then there is a third filter. It's a biological filter. Your cochlea, the part of your inner ear that processes the sound is made out of living cells. And the sleeping cells are going to trigger differently according to how often they hear the sound. It's an habituation effect. Those are you know living cells so they align in a way that correspond to different frequencies. And all have slightly different thresholds in which they're fire. And these threshold changes with how much we hear a certain sound, which means that your cell are just not going to fire as much after a while. If you hear one sound a lot. And because your voice is a sound you hear the most in your own life, we could almost simplifies these thinking that you have an imprint of your own voice inside your own inner ear that makes those cells fire less. So you hear your voice even less because of that. Is it literally reducing the volume of what we hear or just tuning it out, tuning it out? It's a question of sensitivity. Finally we have a force filter. It's a neurological filter. Neurologists found out recently that when you open your mouth to create a sound, your own auditory cortex shuts down. So you hear your voice, but your brain actually never listens to the sound of humans. When you hear sounds in general, whether it is voices of other people or sounding your environment, your brain takes a signal and do a lot of different kind of analysis, very quickly to kind of understand where it comes from, whether there's a danger, how you should understand your interaction and the intent of the people you're talking to. But when it's your own voice, your brain does not process it the same way. Your auditory cortex is actually barely active or a way less active when you hear your own voice. One of the main theory is, well, your brain does not need to spend that much energy when it's your own voice because it's self-produced. So that was how we hear our own voice, but how do other people hear us? When we come back, more with researcher Rebecca Kleinberge and the surprising things that people can glean from the sound of our voice. Today on the show, the soundtracks of our lives. You're listening to the Ted Radio Hour from NPR, I'm Manusz Amorodie and we'll be right back. This message comes from Silversy. If you could travel deeper and linger longer, where would your curiosity take you? From the arctic to the South Pacific, Silversy opens up a world of discovery, bringing you closer to the remote, the rare, and the remarkable, on spacious, intimate ships where all inclusive luxury is just the beginning. To learn more, visit Silversy.com. This message comes from the Financial Times. When it comes to voicing or acting on our opinions, why are some of us more confident than others? By reading the Financial Times, you form your own opinions with conviction based on unbiased and trusted reporting, whether you're exploring unique data journalism that asks what makes the US truly exceptional, or an explainer on what Trump is likely to do in his first 100 days in office. The FT tackles global issues with an impartial and rigorous mindset, providing the analysis you need to make up your own mind. Visit ft.com-teddradiohour to read free articles and save 40% on an annual subscription. This message comes from American Express. With AMX Business Platinum, pursuing your passions is even more rewarding. With 1.5 times membership rewards points on select purchases, you earn rewards that can take your business further. And with complimentary access to more than 1400 airport lounges globally, including the Centurion Lounge, you can keep running your business while you're on the go. That's the powerful backing of American Express. Terms and points cap apply. Learn more at american express.com slash AMX Business. It's the Ted Radio Hour from NPR. I'm Manu Shzamirodi. On the show today, the sound tracks of our lives. And we were just talking to voice researcher Rebecca Klein-Bergie about the various filters that our brain uses to tune out our own voice so that we're not distracted by it. But what about when you hear your own voice played back to you? Why do so many of us hate the sound of our own voice? I don't hear it the same as other people do. We don't have some mechanism to analyze it. That's why it's so odd when you hear it recorded. This is our first time driving through of Monument Valley and I've been waiting for you to relax and do something. Recording of my voice. It's always slightly awkward, I would say, to listen to my voice. At least it sounds quite differently to what I think I sound. And this is something that's quite universally reported. I mean, it is interesting. Like when I was growing up, you didn't hear your own voice often at all. I mean, it was very rare. I remember getting a tape recorder and recording my own voice and playing it back. And that was so disturbing almost. But now people are recording themselves all the time, videos and podcasts and leaving voice memos and playing them back. Do you think that people are hearing themselves differently or making peace with the sound of their own voice in ways that maybe they didn't 10 years ago, 20 years ago? It's quite paradoxical because as a species or as the animals we are, we are not supposed to be able to hear our voice. The recordings, the ability to dissociate time and space in terms of the use of the voice is something that's very unnatural. And even though it's been around for a long time that we have those technology and indeed it's being used more and more often, I believe that there's still a part of our brain that is not completely used to it. Our brain has developed over so so many years to get to the point where it is to have all those optimization of the voice and so much of it happens at a subconscious level. When I hear someone else, completely subconsciously I'm going to automatically analyze a lot of different elements. Beyond words, I'm going to get a sense of their age, their genders, their health, the physiology of their face, the shape of their nose, the shape of their nose? Absolutely, you can, people are really good at giving a good estimate of those shapes just from hearing voices. And people are really good at detecting hormone levels from the voice. So also the element beyond words, I mean when I talk to you, then I'm going to let a lot of things naturally go that gives you an indication about who I am, about my body shape, about my health, about my hormonal identity, etc. Your voice is also varying to how you create relationship. You have a different voice for every person you talk to. If I take a little snippet of your voice and I analyze it, I can know whether you're talking to your mother, to your brother, your friend or your boss. We can also use as a predictor as a vocal posture, meaning how you decide to place your voice when you talk to someone. So there's a lot to learn from listening to voices. Yeah, it's funny, I'm okay with listening to my own voice on the radio, but my daughter was making fun of me the other day of the voice that she says I use that's different when I'm on the radio versus yelling at them to get out the door because they're late for school, obviously a different voice. Yeah, and I think there are evolutionary reasons for that. Also the fact that we also have a performing voice, right? As a teacher, I know that I'm sure as a radio person, you're very familiar with this. And this is a voice of performance, it's a voice of how I present myself in the world. The word expression literally means a voice, it's pressing towards the outside. How we express yourself, who we are in the word is our voice, but is a specific voice that we reserve for the world and for who we want to be in the world. And sometime when we're back into our more familiar environments, it can feel odd to suddenly meet that person again. Is this me? Or is this me as a performer? So many different identities, I guess we take on and our voice reflects that. Yeah, it's a marker for free identity. I think it's a good way of thinking about it. So if we go back to this question, why don't we like the sound of a phone voice? It's really, it's a performance aspect, the vulnerability aspect. And another way to think about it is that we actually secretly do. When we don't know that it's our voice, we actually like our voice quite a lot. So there are studies in which people were listening to a lot of different voice samples, among which some of them were their own voice samples, but they were not really aware of which one they were or that their voice were kind of hidden in there. And systematically people sing to score their own voice higher than other people's voice when they don't know it's their own. So if you didn't know it was your voice, you might actually think, oh yeah, that's some great. That's a good voice, that's nice. I'm feeling very, very in line with this person, but once you know it's your own voice, you have this kind of cringe feeling of vulnerability, of realizing how much you reveal in your voice that maybe you wish you did not. But what about people who struggle with the ability to control their voice? Rebecca has also been researching ways to help people who stutter. What's really interesting with stutterings that their inner voice does not stutter. When they think they don't stutter, when they read silently their voice does not stutter. So it's really a discrepancy in the outer voice that lasts a bit of control between preparing your action and the action coming out. So some of the ways to think about it is they're going to create sound and the brain thinks that there's too much difference between what they hear and what they intend to say. So instead of letting go of the flow of the voice, it just reboots itself. So if I say, ah, and I hear, ah, I'm like, that's fine. If I say, ah, and suddenly I hear E or O, my brain is going to think something is odd. And subconsciously, I'm going to change my muscle position to try to go back to what I'm trying to and this reboot is what we think creates those, those time difference of blockages, repetition or continuation of sound. But I would say people who stutter most often do not stutter when they're sing. This is different between speech and music is quite fundamental in stuttering. And if we can trick the brain to make it sing that it's singing when it's actually speaking, we could help people stutter reduce their differences. Yeah, I wondered if you could tell me about mumball melody then this project that you've been working on. Yes, it's led to the mumball melody project and to several studies of musically modulated auditory feedback. I've had speech therapy since it's fascinating because in the video you have of mumball melody, there's a woman who speaks and she is stuttering on certain words she's struggling with. Suttering, so. And then we hear her speak while she's wearing an earpiece that is putting, I guess you would say, a filter on her voice, is that fair to say? Exactly a modulating filter. The notes app I use all the time because if I think of something, I'm going to forget it, so just write it down. Or like little things that I see that I want to look into later. So she's hearing her voice in a different way in her own head. But what we hear when she speaks is a much more sort of fluent, relaxed way of talking and she doesn't stumble at all. The notes app I use all the time because if I think of something, I'm going to forget it so just write it down. Yeah, so we believe that this is actually changing the brain pathway used in producing and perceiving the voice. And it has led to really great results in terms of fluencies. So we are really working on personalizing all the different parameters so that people can really make their own use of it. I just want to have one other question about the voice. You said earlier that the brain has a way of filtering out our inner voice so that it doesn't distract us. But what about when we hum or sing or talk to ourselves aloud? I've always kind of wondered why do we bother? We could just think it. We don't actually need to make the sound. Yeah, and I think this is very interesting to understand and even to think where does it come from? Because we have language, we have words, but what does a voice mean without those words? For example, when I read a text, I'm always reading it with a voice, whether it's my voice, someone else's voice. If you read an email that come from a colleague, you might often read it with their voice in your hand. And sometimes we can't even control it because our brain is constantly making those mental model of voices when it comes to inner sound. You can sometimes imagine an entire song or symphony, but my big central theory here is that we think silently and that is only possible because you yourself have a voice. So sound come before words. And I would say I spent the past 15 years studying the human voice and my main realization or theory is that the voice beyond word is so much richer. You often think of the voice as a vehicle to transmit words, but I like to turn that around and say words are just an excuse to have vocal interaction. What we share with each other through the voice beyond the word is really so much more important is we share who we are. That was Rebecca Kleinbergier, she is a professor of Humanics and Voice Technology at Northeastern University. You can see her full talk at TED.com. We have been talking about the human voice and AI generated music, but we can't talk about the soundtracks of our lives without mentioning the sounds of mother nature. Musician, snow raven grew up in Arctic Siberia as part of the indigenous Sakakulture. She learned at a young age to mimic the animals around her. Her keen ear and gift for recreating animal sounds aren't just a neat trick though. As she explains, her vocalizations connect her to the Siberian landscape. Here she is on the TED stage in 2024. Nadia Nargi, this is the way indigenous sahap people greet one another. This phrase has no exact English translation, but it means I greet the universe in your person. My name is Snow Raven and I'm from the Republic of Sahayakutea in Arctic Siberia. The most cold settle place, north where winters temperature can drop as low as negative 9 to 6 Fahrenheit. So out of 6 years being away from Sahayakutea, I returned this summer to see my family and also visit our ancestral home. The first thing I did when I arrived was drop into silence and listen. Listening is one of the powerful gifts the universe has given humans to connect with nature. It is by listening that I have learned how to mimic nature. I listen with my imagination and become the animal that I hear. I move like it moves. I seek what it seeks. I cry with its cry. The owl can come, for instance. It has night vision. It can see all around him and also flies without making a sound. The elia brown kite Swores when he hit the air and we joy announces the arrival of the summer. When I hear the moon, I feel it's longing for its partner alongside its love of the baby. It carries. The crane, the dance of this beautiful bird is so stunning and divine that Sahayak people believe that the heavy are their eyes who even ones witnessed. The dance of a crane in a wilderness. The rain des, taba, are lords of tandra and they run thousands of miles in huge herds to restore and recover their energy. They have a special breath. Bergh in a wolf's cry. I can hear the loneliness of the hunter and its yearning for the freedom beyond the body. It sees the moon and wants to join it in the sky. So that superpower of listening is that it leaves the room for imagination to dance with a sound. Let's listen. Ignite our imagination and summon our animal superpowers here and now. Great. That was snow raven. You can watch her amazing talk at TED.com. Thank you so much for listening to the show and making it part of the soundtrack of your life. This episode was produced by Rachel Faulknerwhite Fiona Guren, James Delausi and Matthew Clutea. It was edited by Sana's meshconcore and me. Our production staff at NPR also includes Katie Montleone and Harsha Nahada. Our executive producer is Irene Noguchi. Our audio engineers were Patrick Murray, Gilly Moon, Jimmy Keeley and Klazie Lee. Our theme music was written by Ramtine Arablui. Our partners at TED are Chris Anderson, Roxanne Hylash, Alejandra Salazar and Danielle Abalarazzo. I'm Manutia Zomerodie and you've been listening to the TED Radio Hour from NPR. This message comes from Shipbob. Outgrown how you ship your business's orders, Shipbob's fulfillment scales with you across locations and channels, delivering smart inventory distribution, two-day shipping and real-time analytics. Go to Shipbob.com for a free quote. This message comes from NPR's sponsor, Viori, a new perspective on performance apparel. Check out the latest dream-nig collection by visiting Viori.com slash NPR for 20% off your first purchase. Exclusion Supply. Visit the website for full terms and conditions. This message comes from Virtua Health, where surgeons perform robotic-assisted procedures including joint replacement, infotility care and cancer treatment. The team at Virtua Health has performed more than 40,000 robotic-assisted surgeries. Virtua Health is committed to rigorous training and innovation. Experienced surgeons apply advanced surgical technology to improve precision and impact patient care. Learn more at Virtua.org slash robotic surgery."}