{"Episode Name": "The Brutal Ramayana War - TRUTHS Hidden From Us | Valmiki Ramayana With Yashodeep D | TRS", "Podcast Name": "Beer Biceps - The Ranveer Show", "Episode Link": "https://the-ranveer-show.simplecast.com/episodes/the-brutal-ramayana-war-truths-hidden-from-us-valmiki-ramayana-with-yashodeep-d-trs-IP6ElAJc", "duration": "01:54:29", "text": " Welcome to a series finale of Ravan. Then popular culture's people think that Ravan treated women very well. Nothing could be further from the truth. There were hundreds of women that he had abducted. He was very proud of that. The vision told Ravan, in open court, what you're doing is wrong, and then we visioned like any one to meet Ravan. The challenge in front of them was how to cross the ocean. He asked to construct the seitune. So this was not a floating bridge. They were going to fill up the sea with big boulders and tree trunks. By the way, this seitune is called Nalce 2, not Ravan's hit. Ravan was more interested in playing dirty tricks rather than preparing for battle. He called Viju Jivr and instructed him to make a replica of Ravan's head and then Ravan went to meet Sita. He told her carefully, your dear husband is dead. It was time to charge onto the gates of Lanka. What is the kind of weapon that you had watched should be released? This is a very strange one. That one side has none of this. The Vanaras fought with their bare hands and they would punch, kick, throw stones, even bite, or they would pick up the weapons of the rutches as themselves and hit them. The Vanaras kept winning again and again. Although both sides suffered heavy casualties, Ravan wanted to fall on Kumbakana. They beat Drams to try and wake him up when they started pulling his head. He got up and he was famished. They had brought meat for him to eat, pick buffalo deer. As well as big jars of blood that was his food. After months of longing, finally they had seen each other. Their faces lit up with joy but then Nams expression changed and he said to her, Oh lady, you should know that I did not fight the war for your sake. Now there is a doubt about your character and I can't even bear to look at you. What sort of a man would take back a woman who has spent some time in someone else's house? This is our series finale of our four-part retelling of the entire Ramayan. The series finale is all about the war between Shri Ram and Ravan. The king of the Rakshasas or the evil force that was present in the world at the time of the Ramayan. Remember that there's only one accurate Ramayan and that's the one written by the sage, Walmikhi. In today's day and age there's only one man in India who has studied Walmikhi's Ramayan with that much intensity with that much force and has gone that much into the depths of the Walmikhi Ramayan. His name is Yasu Adi, they were there so who helped us create this very special four-part series. If you've not watched the first three parts, watch them at the end of watching this particular part. Because all of us loosely know the story of the Ramayan but we do not know the details and the details are very different from the movies, from the anime, from the comic books that you've read. That's the intention with this whole series that every single Indian gets to know the real raw unfiltered version of the Ramayan. Make sure you check out the other three parts. But today enjoy this very special war-oriented episode of Walmikhi's Ramayan. Begins with Yasu Deep Dev Darshal in 3-2-1. Welcome back Yasu Deep Sal. Thank you very much. Welcome to our series finale. Thank you for this beautiful series that we're going to stay on the internet for another 50 years. Thank you very much for this opportunity to take Merhi Walmikhi's words to all of your audience. I'm glad. Again in my eyes I look at this as duty towards Sanatana because every generation has its own retelling of Ramayan. For me it wasn't even Ramayan, it was Ramayan, it was the anime. That's how I visualize the Ramayan and I'm hoping that this podcast series is kind of a cornerstone for many people's visualization and definitely they should eventually find your series that you created on your channel. But this has been a beautiful experience until now. Like very, very, very, educated. Thank you. So welcome back to the studio. This is the series finale. Yes. Before I let you continue with the story, let's do a tiny recap of where we we left off and then have an additional question after that. Okay. So where did we leave off? At the end of our last discussion, Hanuman had come back from Lanka. He had reached Kishkinda and told Sri Ram that he had found Sita in Lanka. And now the task ahead is very clear. They have to go to Lanka, defeat the Rakshasas and rescue Sita. That's why we are. Okay. In my eyes, this episode is about war. Yes, we will read the book called Yukdakan, which is called Book of War. Okay. And I also feel that for some reason with a lot of Sanatonese, this is one of the lesser known aspects of Ramayan for some reason. Everyone knows a lot of aspects of the previous stories, but we don't know the details of the war. Do you agree? Do you disagree? Many times in the later retellings, yes, I have not seen as graphic and detailed descriptions of the war as in the Walmikiram and some of them are actually gory, very detailed and it's a fairly large book, the Yukdakan. So today we'll be covering almost a quarter of the entire story. Perhaps because it's gory, it's not showcased in mainstream media. Perhaps yes. That's the beauty of podcasts. So sir, before I let you begin, I have a tiny question that the team picked up from the comments section on the first two episodes, which was that all these dialogue exchanges that happened between the characters. How has Marishiv almiki written it accurately? Because he wasn't present when the dialogues were happening. Of course, yes. So what's your take on that? Well, this is Ramayan means Ramasayayana, Ram's journey. This is Ram's biography, Ramasayatritham. So like any biographer, Marishiv almiki would have to do the hard work of speaking to all the characters, the people involved and recreate the dialogues that accurately represent the thoughts and emotions of the people at that time. So that is the hard work. But Marishiv almiki was also blessed in the sense that in Ramayana itself, it is said that Brahma, Lord Brahma, who is the creative aspect in divinity, he had blessed Walmiki that he would know exactly what had happened in each of these events. That's why we call him a Maharishi as well. Yes, he was a Maharishi. You know, I've always thought of this word Maharishi and I discussed it once with I think Rariishi and he said that one of the biggest misconceptions about Sanatana is that the goal is simply enlightenment or mokshu and Nirvana. But according to the Anthrasha Asand and Dhravidya, there's many, many stages beyond the stage of enlightenment and moksh. Like you go way beyond enlightenment is in fact a qualification for the next stage of spiritual growth. What we commonly know as enlightenment and there's a long pathway up till god. Somewhere up there is the level of Rishi and way beyond that is Maharishi where you almost become into eternal and you know, 12,000 BC supposedly when the Ramayana happened and we're setting your 14,000 years later still talking about Maharishi Walmiki. Yes, this is an extraordinary text no doubt about it. Yeah, there was a divine element that was flowing through him to write the details of this. Yes. Okay. Now let's move on to war. Okay. So Hanuman had reported back and Shri Ram asks him before leaving for Lanka. He asks him all about the layout and fortifications of the city, the size and strength of the army where the different troops are located within the city as well as at the gates. This was valuable military intelligence. See Hanuman had observed Lanka at night when he was searching for Sita and then again when Ravan ordered his tail to be put on fire and he was paraded around. Shri Hanuman made careful observations about the layout of the city and this was the military intelligence he now conveyed to Shri Ram and then Ram gave orders for the army to proceed south. Time was running out for Sita. They had to get to Lanka fast and when he asked the army to proceed south Ram gave detailed directions. He appointed specific people to guard the front and rear of the army, the left and right flanks. We're talking about Humpy right now. Yes, we are in the region of Humpy at Kishkinda and we are going south towards Lanka. Many times the Vanaras are shown in popular culture or in popular versions of the Ram and as a disorganized bunch. So if this army had to move south, they simply walked down. Well, they did walk down but they were very organized in this. Just like they had launched the search for Sita and a very organized manner to the folk on us of the world. Even now there was a forward party under the direction of Neil who found out the best route for the army. Neil, yes, he was a Vanar leader okay. And the forward party had to determine the path that offered them enough food and water sources make sure that the water sources weren't poisoned by the enemy. They had to make sure that they did not cause disturbances in the villages and agricultural fields that they passed by and so on. So there was this forward army and then a forward party and then behind that the main army. The army was so huge, millions of Vanaras that Walmiki says it was almost like a sea that was coming south to meet the ocean. Wow. As they walked, one night they were resting for a while and Laksman looked up at the sky and he remarked that the stars seemed to be aligned in our favor. And then he spoke about some specific stars, constellations and their movements. And these are the kind of clues that are used again by researchers to date the events of the Ramite. The army proceeded further. They walked day and night with very little rest and finally they came to the southern sea shore as they looked out to the sea. They were stunned. How were they going to cross this? Walmiki says the sea with its foaming waves seemed to be laughing and dancing. How were they going to cross? Now I had said last time as well the popular story of floating rocks is not mentioned in the Walmiki Ramite. But Walmiki leaves us in suspense as to how the army will actually cross and then shifts the sea into Lanka. In Lanka, Ravan was a little unnerved. Hanuman had caused great damage in the city. He had killed many rakshasas when he said fire to Lanka, remember. And now he had heard that an army was marching towards Lanka. Ravan's younger brother Vibhishan was telling him to let Sita go into a void war. He told Ravan why this war at all? Ram has not done anything wrong. It was Kerr who attacked Ram and Ram acted in self-defense. How can you blame him for that? This is the Shurpana kha chapter. Yes, so it started with Shurpana kha. Shurpana kha asked Kerr to attack Ram. Kerr attacked and got himself killed and Ram wiped out all the rakshas forces at Janasthan. Now interestingly, in these discussions, you know, we often go back and say, oh, the Shurpana kha incident, like you just asked me. But no one mentioned Shurpana kha in this incident between Vibhishan and Ravan, they are only talking about what Ravan did to Kerr and the rakshas forces. And that is why Ravan wants to take revenge. He does not, his primary goal is not to take revenge for what happened to Shurpana kha. You know, sometimes we think that that was his primary goal. And so he was in some way justified in abducting Sita, but that is totally incorrect. So, Ravan then called a meeting of all his seniormost leaders to discuss this matter. An army was coming towards them and he wanted to get their thoughts on this. I want to show you a short video to see what is the quality of discussion that is going on in Ravan's court. Watch. A dressing, a packed court, Ravan said, there is one matter I wish to discuss with all of you. I would have done it sooner, but kumbakarina was not available, therefore the slight delay. I have got Sita, Dham's wife from Tandakaranya. No other woman is as beautiful and charming as her. Oh, that gorgeous face that's slender waist and those hips. Tanumadha, Prutush Rony, Sharadindunibhana, My last for her is driving me crazy, but Sami in the Shayama, Arur, whom ithati, she refuses to climb into my bed. And Ravan is reportedly on his way to Lanka with an army of wanderers. Please suggest what we should do now so that Sita remains with me. Upon hearing this, Ravan's younger Prutta, kumbakarina said, what you have done is not right. You should have consulted us before, but never mind. I will still support you. I will send off Rama to meet the Lord of Death, and Sita will be yours forever. My brother, enjoy life. Mahaparshwar then spoke up. He did not think a woman's consent or otherwise mattered in any way. He made this shocking suggestion. A man is a fool if he finds a drink and does not drink it. Valaat kukkutavrthayana, Pravarthasvamha bala, Akramya kramya sita, Amwai, Tham Bhum trojara maswata. Oh Lord, just force yourself on Sita as a rooster forces itself on a hen. I solved her again and again, devour her and enjoy her. This is shocking. How could this be such things? Yes, Ravan's ideas on how women should be treated. Was shared by those he had collected around himself. Ravan liked what Mahaparshwar said, but replied, let me tell you about an incident that happened a while back. I once crossed paths with the gorgeous Punjika's Thala. Afraid of me, she was trying to sneak away. But, Saa prasahya maiya vukta, krtha vivasa na datta. I got hold of her, stripped her and ravaged her. Afterwards, she looked like a trampled lotus. L'Olita nalini yaka. For this, I was cursed by Lord Brahma, that if I ever violated another woman in such a manner, my head would split into a hundred pieces. And therefore, I cannot force myself on Sita. Kind of stuff you can't show a national television. That's why you never heard this aspect of the story before. Yes. You know, sometimes people think that Ravan treated women very well. In fact, his treatment was exemplary. Nothing could be further from the truth. Mashiwalmiki has told us clearly what he thought. Even earlier, he kidnapped Sita because he had a fight with Ram. That's how it started. Right? So he thought nothing on taking revenge on a man by kidnapping his wife. And at that time, you would recall he grabbed her by the hair, dragged her to the rath. Later on in a showc one, he was ready to punch her. And when Hanuman was looking for Sita, he had gone to Ravan's bed chamber. We saw that there were hundreds of women that he had abducted from different lands. In fact, he was very proud of that. He had showed off to Sita that you will be the chief among them, say yes to me. And now you saw the type of comments he as well as his ministers made about Sita. Now in this assembly, Vibhishan was the same voice and he was telling Ravan to let Sita go in a void war. He said, for the good of the Rakshasas, for the good of Lanka, let Sita go, but Indrajit mocked him in Rajith Ravan's son. He said, you are too scared to fight. And Ravan went on a rant against Vibhishan. He called him names and among them, by the way, he called him Anariya, not Arya like. So Ravan considered himself Arya, which is a noble person. This has nothing to do with race. Vibhishan could not take it. He told Ravan, you are my elder brother and I should respect you like a father, but you have lost your mind and you are not on the path of Dharma, right? Yes, I cannot be a party to this. I shall leave now be well without me. Swastita is to Ghamishami, Suki Baba, Maia Vinha, and then Vibhishan left, any went to Meetraam. Now, Vibhishan also switched sides, but he was no backstabbing traitor. Again, in popular culture, sometimes Vibhishan is thought of as a traitor, but see, here he told Ravan in open court that I am leaving and Ravan had not induced him to leave. Any left for a good reason, he was saying, what you are doing is wrong. I cannot be a party to this. And so, I shall leave. Vibhishan went to Meetraam and he sent a message that he was seeking refuge from Dham, and he would like to join them. Sugri was clearly against this. He thought it was too risky. He was a brother of Ravan coming and saying that, you know, he wanted to join them. Perhaps this was a trick. He could try and create divisions among them. So, Sugri recommended that they should not allow Vibhishan to join. Anger than Jambavan also thought so. But Hanuman was willing to give him the benefit of doubt. Also, Hanuman knew something that the others did. When Hanuman had met Sita in Ashokwan in Lanka, Sita had told him that this younger brother of Ravan was trying to secure her release. So, with this information, Hanuman's advice was that they should allow him in. Ravan made his decision. He said, I grant him protection. Please bring him to Meet. And he also convinced Sugri why that was the right thing to do. Now, this incident brings out Ravan's leadership qualities. See, he was open-minded about Vibhishan, even though he was Ravan's brother. And for this important question, he asked all his advisors what they thought of it. The advisors had differing opinions. Ravan then made a decision, which was a risky call. He was willing to make this risky decision. But he also explained his logic and brought along the others who were earlier speaking, who had earlier recommended otherwise. Who were the advisors? Sugri, Jambavan, Hanuman, all of them. Yes. Now, compare these leadership styles. You know, we just saw how Ravan treated this question. On the other hand, Ravan, he made the decision to abduct Sita and pick a fight with Ravan without consulting anyone. That is how Ravan made his decision. And when he heard that Anami was marching towards him, he called his advisors for a meeting and Vibhishan spoke up against him. He threw him out. So these were two different leadership styles. So now Vibhishan had joined them, but still the challenge in front of them was how to cross the ocean. In fact, even earlier, at the end of Sundar Khan, you would remember, Hanuman had told Sita, gallantly, that before long, you shall hear the roar of the Vanaras. And Sita had asked him, but how will they cross the ocean? Katham Nukaludhush Param, Tarishanti Mahoda, them. Hanuman did not have an answer at that time, but he had assured her. He had said, if I can do it, so can the others. Don't worry about it. Even now, Sugrive told Ram, if somehow we can cross the ocean, once we see the city of Lanka, consider Ravan tag. But how to cross the ocean was now something Ram had to address. Walmiki then describes Ram's actions very poetically. I'll tell you how he has actually described it and then later what it means. Ram folded his hands. In front of the ocean and then lay down, gazing at its waters for three days and three nights. That is how much he was Miki has described it. And then he fired off arrows at the ocean. The Lord of the sea appeared and then showed him the way to go across. What it means is that Ram stood gazing at the sea. He was observing the sea for three days and three nights. The currents, the tides, the rise and fall of water, house and banks and islands appeared in it. See, that part of the sea is very shallow. So as the tide recedes, there are sand banks and small islands that come out. And Ram was trying to determine the best location to construct the sea too. The place where the distance to the other side is minimal. The tides and currents are favorable. And this is likely Rameshuram? Yes, most likely. In fact, from Rameshuram further out, there is a place called Dhhanushkodi. And then from then, you can see from satellite images that there are small structures along the way. See, right now what we know is Ram has identified the site selection. And then he asked Nal, the greatest construction experts among the Vanaras to construct the sea too. The idea of the Seethu was very simple. They were going to fill up the sea with big boulders, rocks, mud and tree trunks on top. So this was a burned or an embankment, not a floating bridge. Although the idea was very simple, the scale of this project was staggering. Think about it, you are standing at the seashore. And somewhere far beyond the horizon, there is an island. And your plan is to fill up the sea and walk across. And then under the direction of Ram, hundreds of thousands of Vanaras sprang up into action. They went to the forest, cut boulders, tree trunks, brought it all back to the shore and started filling up the sea. Once again, they were very methodical. They used different types of devices, young three. Also different teams were assigned to do different tasks. Some worked on getting all the material, other on tying up things, others on making measurements and so on. And slowly the Seethu started taking shape. On the first day, they covered a distance of 14 eugenas. And then they picked up speed and over the next four days, covered 20, 21, 22 and 23 eugenas. And thus they covered the entire 100 eugenas of the Seethu. Remember, this was the distance that Hanuman had to go across as well in our last session. Is there anything said about the time it took? Five days. Wow. Yes. In fact, this is very, Walmik is very specifically told about how much they covered in on each day. It was a giant Seethu extremely well constructed. Vishalahar, Sukrutahar. In fact, the scale was astonishing beyond conception. At Bhutam, Achintam. And on this, Seethu millions of genres started walking across. By the way, this Seethu interestingly, in the Raman is called Nalcehtu, not Ramsehtu. So, named after the chief engineer, they walked across and without any challenge from the their accesses, they reached close to the city of Lanka. Note, this is already a strategic mistake by Raman. He could have attacked this army as they were landing on Lanka. That would have been a weaker point for them. But he allowed them to finish the Seethu, come across and come almost up to the city of Lanka. And the reason he did that was he was not expecting this at all. See, Raman was always very confident that no army could cross the ocean. In fact, even now he said, what Raman has done is unprecedented. I still can't believe it, making a Seethu across the ocean. He realized that he had clearly underestimated the enemy. So, he asked some of his spies to go into the enemy camp and find out more about them. How many are they? Who are the leaders? What are they telling Raman and so on? The spies, when they came back, they reported to Raman and now here, Murshiv Almiki takes a detour. See, we've taken a few of these detour earlier. You would recall when Sugri was sending the parties to search for Seetha, we looked at a detour about a world Atlas, geography, at another time about botany or the kachit discussion, right, in the beginning in Chitra-Kur between Bharath and Ram, which was a detour on governance, the oldest text on governance. And now this detour is on mathematical terms. So, this is an interesting point to put this detour. Raman has asked, how many are they? And the spies are giving the answer. How large is the enemy? I'll show you some of the actual verses. Sure. Yeah. So, the first verse, Shatam Shatas-as-ra-na, Kottima-hur-mani-shin-ha, Shatam-kortis-as-ra-na, Shanku-hu, it'd be the heothae. 100 of 100,000 is called one crore. So, 100 lakh is one crore, he's defining 10 raised to the past seven. And then further he says 100,000 crores is one Shanku, which is 10 raised to the part 12. Or in today's term, trillion. 100,000, 12 zeros is one Shanku. And then over the next few slocas, he's describing 100,000 Shanku's makeup. Mahashanku, 100,000 Mahashanku's is equal to one Rindha. And it goes on. Mm. A Maha-hug has 10 raised to the past 60 zeros. Wow. Why do we need math like this? Exactly. Now, that's an interesting question. The fact that Marjivalmiki has defined these terms, means the mathematicians of that time required these terms, whether it's for astronomical calculations or construction. Some sort of precision, precision, and the scale of calculations. Also, clearly this is an exaggeration. If you look at the total, so by the way, the spice, after they finish all these definitions, they say, the Vanarami is many, many Maha-ugas, right, more than 10 raised to the past 60. This is clearly an exaggeration, because if you look at the total surface area of the earth, and you assume that let's say one one, or needs even one square foot then so many Vanaras cannot fit on the earth. Not only the earth, they cannot fit even if you pack them on all the planets of the solar system, or even a trillion earths are not enough. So clearly this is an exaggeration. Now, so Marjivalmiki, as far as the size goes, the answer is it was a huge army, right? And he has used this to define these mathematical terms. So this huge army was at Raavant's doorstep, but he was more interested in playing dirty tricks and intrigue, rather than preparing for battle. He came up with a plan to deceive Sita and get her to submit to him. He called the Raksas, Viju Jiva, and instructed him to make a lifelike replica of Ram's head. Viju Jiva was an expert in this, and he made a very realist model, and then Raavant went to meet Sita. He told her Jivoli, your dear husband is dead. You fool, you kept refusing me, because you thought that Ram will come and save you. But how will he come now? Let me tell you how it all happened. Ram was coming here together with some Vanaras, and they had camped on the other side of the ocean, and my forces under the leadership of Prasth went there at night, and while Ram was sleeping, Prasth swore, slice through his neck without any problem. I have got his blood soaked head for you to see. Then he turned to the Raksasis, and said, go and get Viju Jiva. He was the one who got the head from the battlefield. Viju Jiva came on cue, and he threw the head at Sita's feet. Sita screamed. She thought this was Ram's head. She sank to the ground, cried bitterly. Sita was completely crushed. But even then, Raavant could not get what he wanted, her consent. That was out of the question. Just then a messenger came, and told Raavant, Ariaputra, there is a matter that the ministers want to discuss with you. Please come to the court urgently, and Raavant went away. Sita was still trembling. One of the Raksasis that had been put to guard her, had become friendly with her. And she told Sita, don't worry about it. This is all the trick. Ram is well. In fact, the army has crossed over to this side. There is going to be a war soon. In fact, you can hear the preparations for the war. Don't worry, you shall soon be with Ram. In Raavant's court, there were people who were making last ditch efforts to try and save trying a word for. Raavant's own mother told him to let Sita go. Raavant's maternal grandfather said, make peace with Ram. It is not wise to fight him. But Raavant was clear. Dvida, bhajay, amapi, nana meyayan, tukasya chit. I may get cut into two pieces, but I will never bend. Meanwhile, in the warner camp, Ram was making preparations for the attack. He assigned specific people to attack the different gates of the city the next day. He also told everyone not to take off their warner at Ayahu, because this was going to be a battle at close quarters. So, the warner attack will tell who is on which side. Which probably also means that the Rachas, army looked like you normally would mean. Yes, yes. Later that night, as Ram looked up at the skyline of Lanka, he thought that one person makes a mistake and so many have to suffer. He knew that this would be a terrible war. Both sides would suffer heavy casualties, and he decided to make one last attempt at peace. So, in the morning, he sent Angad to speak to Raavant. Angad went to Raavant's court. Raavant was sitting on his magnificent throne. Angad introduced himself. He said, I am Walee's son and Ram's messenger. My name is Angad. You may have heard about me. Honestly, when it comes to Angad, it's a character that's fascinated me a lot. Ever since I saw the animated Ram, I'm looking for a child in me, that's my reference point. They've shown him very beautifully in that film. You don't hear too much about Angad when someone is skimming through the story of the Ram. But certain retellings highlight him a lot. So, there is this one interaction that he has with Raavant. I'll loosely remember where he showcases acrobatics and something around his tail. I can't remember the exact story. Yes, in fact, in popular retellings, this is where it comes. So, in other retellings, not in the Walmi Karaman, it is said that Angad grew his tail to a great length. He coiled it and then sat on top of it, so that he was at an equal height to Raavant. Now, in the Walmi Karaman, that is not described. But I just told you how he spoke to Raavant. Even though he's a young boy, maybe a teenager, and he said, to this great king of their actresses, he spoke to him as an equal. Now, many times, the story of Raman is depicted in sculptures or paintings. How do you show confidence in stone? So, this is a beautiful way. The coil tail and raising himself at a height, a beautiful way to depict that Angad spoke to him with confidence. So, many of the other retellings, they are true to the spirit of the Walmi Karaman, even though they may be telling the story differently. Just now, we had also heard the story of how the seitu was constructed. Now, the later retellings where they talk about the Vanara's writing, Ram's name on rocks, and because of which the rocks were floating. Again, it conveys the sentiment that the Vanara's were inspired by Ram in every step. So, once we understand the Walmi Karaman, we can actually understand and appreciate the other versions as well, even though they are telling the story in a different way. And then he gave Ram's message to Raavant. You while Rakshas, for too long people have suffered because of you, but no more. It was so brave of you to kidnap Sita while I was away. Well, now is the time to show your bravery once again, but this time on the battlefield, come out and fight with me. But before you come, make sure you have done the preparations for your last rites. For I will surely kill you and everyone who supports you, this was Ram's message delivered by Amkar. Raavant was crazed with anger and he ordered, kill this oneer. Once again, no, Raavant paid no heed to the code among kings that an ambassador or envoy should not be killed, but he gave the orders to kill. Four Rakshasas came and grabbed Amkar. And that's when Anghad threw them off swiftly and they went tumbling and he jumped onto a balcony. And there he kicked and broke the balcony, destroyed the roof and then jumping from one roof top to the next he went out of the city. Raavant had rejected the last piece of her. So now it was time to charge on to the gates of Lanka. Ram gave the orders and remember, Lanka had a boundary wall and outside the wall there was a motor. But this was hardly a challenge for the Vanaras. They had just filled up the sea. So filling up the motor was fairly simple. Once again, they filled it up with rocks and mud and logs of wood and charged on the gates. The gates came crashing down, they broke the boundary wall as well at some points. And then Raavant gave the order to counter attack. This is the beginning of the battle. This is the beginning of the battle. There's the very common story about Raavant being a Shiva Bhakth and praying to Shiva for his powers, etc. Is anything said about Raavant's spiritual journey or his tantra based journey at all in the Walmikiramaya? No, those things are emphasized much more in the later retellings. In the Walmikiramaya, Raavant is a great warrior, no doubt. And even as far as preparations go, there is no puja that he does at the beginning. He prepares his arms and gets ready for battle. By the way, in this first instant, instance, he does not come out himself. So he will come out in some time. But there's no mention of him going about any spiritual practice. Not in the Walmikiramaya, from Balakan to the Yudhakan. And right in the beginning, I think we had once spoken about the Yudhakan. Remember that the Yudhakan was not written by Walmiki. So whenever I'm saying that something is or is not a part of the Walmikiramaya, I'm talking about Balakan to Yudhakan. Gotcha. These are all additional anecdotes. Yes. Okay. Now let's move on. So Raavant gave the order to counter attack. And the Rakshas has came with their horses, chariots, elephants. They had all the yasters and chasters, bows and arrows, spears. See, the Vanaras had nothing. They were fighting with rock street trunks, their bare hands. And the Rakshasami was extremely well equipped. And they were able to push back the Vanaras a little bit. So most of the battle happened outside the city gates. Although they had broken through the gates on the first day itself, the battle ground was outside the city. Against tiny indejection. For you, you believe after studying the Walmikiramaya that this was the island of Sri Lanka. Yes. Yes. My question to you is that part of India where Rameshwaram is, right? You see that little strip of land that joins the island of Sri Lanka. So within Sri Lanka, is there a particular geographical location that you think was the location of this battle? See, based on the descriptions of the Walmikiramaya, you cannot accurately pinpoint where exactly on the island it took place. But it's possibly near that strip of land that we see on geographical maps. No, the strip of land connected it to the larger island of Lanka. But we don't know exactly. Oh, yeah. As far as the descriptions of the Walmikiramaya, have you been to Sri Lanka? Yes. Yes. You have. Yes. The name is Paul Wilson of the first episode, right? Yes. What did you feel there? No, like all the descriptions of the main locations, Ayodhya, Panchavati, Kishkinda and Lanka, right? There is a feeling. So you asked me what I felt, right? In all these locations, there is a special feeling that these locations have been witness to what Sri Ram, Lakshman Sita and Hanuman did. So it's a special feeling. Gotcha. Okay. I will let you carry on with the story. Now the war is at close contacts. See, the rakshasas have lost another strategic advantage. First of all, they were on an island. They could have attacked the army as it was landing. Secondly, they had arms that they could fire from a distance, bows and arrows, spears. They could have attacked the army while it was still outside the boundary wall. But now it was a man-to-man combat. And this played to the Vanara's advantage. And on this first day, the Vanara has kept winning again and again. Although both sides suffered heavy casualties, the rakshasas were losing more numbers. They were losing their leaders. But then the tide turned because of someone who fought in a very different way. And this was Ravan's son, Indraji. Walmiki says he made himself invisible, Adrashya. In other words, he fought in a way that it was extremely difficult to figure out where he was firing from. Stealth. Stealth. He would fire from behind the enemy lines, not right at the front lines. Also, he would fire things that would explode in the air and then release arrows. So you don't know where he is firing from. And he killed hundreds of Vanara's. He caused great destruction in the Vanara army. And then he targeted Ravan's Locksman. Soon they were bleeding heavily. His arrows were laced with poison. So they couldn't even react. And then Ravan's Locksman collapsed on the ground. Unconscious. And Indraji incorrectly thought that his job was done. And he went back into the city. He went and reported to Ravan that he had killed Ravan Locksman. Ravan got up, hugged his son and thought that the war was over. On the very first day, outside, the Vanara's made a protective circle around Ravan's Locksman. They were only unconscious, not dead. Ravan regained consciousness after some time, but he was grievously injured. Sugriv asked Sushayna, who was a good man. She was the medical expert among the Vanara's. Whether they should take back Ravan Locksman to Kishkindha to recover. But Sushayna said that they had to quickly administer two herbs. Sanjeevani and Vishalya Karini to Ravan Locksman. Now, where to get these herbs? Wow. Until now, the traditional story of herd is that it was just Locksman, Bhagawan, who collapsed. That is coming later. Okay. Yes, that happens again. Yes. For Samhir Singh's story. So right now, Ravan Locksman both need Sanjeevani and Vishalya Karini. They're discussing where to get it from. And at that time, a garoud appears. Garouds were also forest dwellers who dressed up like eagles. So we have seen forest dwellers who dressed up like monkeys or bears or vultures. This one dressed up like an eagle, he came and he took out the arrows from Ravan Locksman's bodies, nursed their wounds and they recovered. And Rama asked him, who are you? And all he said was, I'm your friend, Oka Kuchta. These rakshasas don't fight fair. Be careful. So you see, people not associated with the war also, like this garoud, who are rooting for Rama. And they, the garoud himself said, I heard that you were in trouble. So I came to help you. We saw this earlier as well. King Gooha in Shunga, where he was ready to lay down this life for Rama, even though he had not asked for it. Or Jata, you who gave up his life trying to protect Sita. So all of these communities and peoples had immense, the Ikshra Khuz had immense goodwill among them. And they were all rooting for Rama's success. Poetically, so I believe garoud is also Vishnu Bhagawan's one. This is the animal associated with Lord Vishnu. Yes. Who's Aftara's Shiram? So when Rama and Lakshman recovered, there was a roar among the Vanaras and Ravan heard that roar in his court. See, he was prematurely celebrating that he had won the war. But when he heard the roar, he realized that something was wrong. And when he found out, he ordered his army to attack once again. The Vanaras were winning. Both sides suffered heavy casualties, but the Vanaras were winning. And then Ravan came out for the first time. Into the battlefield. By the way, when he came out, interestingly, Vibhishan pointed him out to Rama. And it's interesting that Vibhishan said there in that distance, the towering person under the white chatra canopy, whose radiant like the sun, that is Ravan. We spoke about Ravan's 10 heads, whether it was a throne or actually he had 10 heads. Now, think about it. If he really had 10 heads, one in the middle, 5-1-1 side, 4 on the other, how would Vibhishan have pointed him out? There, that person with the 10 heads, that is Ravan. That's not what Vibhishan said. Ravan laid into the Vanaras. He was causing great destruction, but Rama went and engaged with him. And Rama struck an arrow in Ravan's chest, which hit him like a thunderbolt and he dropped his bow. Rama's next arrow took off Ravan's crown, and then Ravan went back into the city. He retreated. See, Ravan was a great warrior, but he knew his own limitations. He was not invincible. Even earlier, he did not attack Rama head on in Panchavati. Took him away, deceiving him, and then abducted Sita. And even now, he realized that he needed to retreat to fight another day. When we're thinking about this battle, what is the kind of weaponry that one should visualize? Because it's usually bows and arrows and swords. Yes. He's forward in the regime briefly. Yes. Sounds very similar to the Mama with weaponry of arrows that kind of are like missiles, poisonous arrows, etc. So what do you visualize when it comes to weaponry? It is all that you said, but in addition, this is a very strange war. That one side has none of this. All the weaponry is on one side only. The Varnaras fought with their bare hands, and they would punch, kick, throw stones, even bite, or they would pick up the weapons of their accesses themselves and hit them. In fact, I want to show you some clips from the battle scene itself, for you to visualize this. Ravan was furious when he learned what had happened. He then sent off Wajradaunstur to lead the next charge. Wajradaunstur led his forces out of the southern gate. Here the Varnarami was under the charge of the young Angad. Once again, it was a dreadful fight. Soon the battle ground was littered with severed heads, limbs, and pussles. Put your fire and shirash chin down, tin the kayash jabutale. Crows and vultures gathered for the feast. Angad started working his way towards Wajradaunstur, who was causing many casualties among the Varnaras. The Rajras saw him coming and struck him with a volley of arrows. Angad's body was trenched in blood, but he kept going closer. And then Angad threw a large rock at Wajradaunstur's chariot and wrecked it. His force The Rajras to fight Angad in hand to hand duel. Just like Hanuman, Angad had forced his adversary off his chariot. Engaging their enemies at close quarters, paid to the Varnaras advantage. Angad and Vajradaunstur punched and hit each other viciously. Both were soon exhausted and started vomiting blood. Rudiro Kari no to to Baha Rijrjani Thashramo. Angad picked up a tree trunk and the Rajras grabbed a sword. They struck each other until both were so tired that they fell to their knees. And then Angad tapped his last bit of energy. He pounced on Wajradaunstur, grabbed his sword in a flash and cut off his head. The Rajras troops lost courage upon seeing their fallen general and ran back to Lanka. Rajrans then ordered a compound to lead the next structures assault. A compound also targeted the Varnar troops near the western gate. Walmiki says the warring forces kicked up a cloud of dust that covered the entire battlefield. One could not see much, but after some time the dust settled because the ground had become soaked with blood. And then a terrible picture emerged. The battlefield was covered with dead bodies. Shari Rajrasha was hungry, Rha, but who was Rajrasundra? I have to break away from the story just a little bit. A couple of things to show. First thing I want to say is, wow, love the battle parts. And this is the kind of stuff again that's not spoken about in lore. I didn't even know this young that story. And this was a relentless war. Day and night, it was not like the Mahabharath from Debrake Till sunset. I have always wondered this about the Ramayana battle. In fact, when we started this series, this was the episode I was looking for to the most because it's the one that's the most shrouded in mystery because we've not been shown it in commercial media. That's the first thing I want to say. The second thing I want to say is, when I'm viewing your work, there's a part of me that views it as a content creator as an editor and the kind of music you've used, the kind of words you've chosen to use. Like what I sense, and I'm not just seeing this because you're so taken from me, it's a very objective opinion. I genuinely feel that Maharshi Walmikhi's energy is flowing through you to make this happen. The only compliment for you here is honestly, I feel you've been humble enough through the storytelling process to allow the high energy to flow through. Like so many people are trying to do this exact job that you've done. But I think you had the right mindset to do the story in a very true to the art form way. Thank you very much. I'm truly humbled to hear this. My entire effort has been to make sure I'm conveying what Maharshi Walmikhi wants to say and not my interpretation or you know, there should be as little of me and people should find out what is it that is actually said in the Walmikhi Ramay. It's been a very humbling experience for me, although it's a certain front of you because at my age, 31 with this kind of glamour around me, one of the challenges has been to you know, tread carefully along this path and not become arrogant and all that. But when I meet people like you who doing this kind of work in such a humble way, plus you've had a flourishing business career all that. You're still this guy. God chose you to say this story for our generation. There's a lot of learnings even subliminally beyond just the story. Thank you so much for saying that. Thanks for coming to the studio and be inaugurated this studio with you and my mother. I'm glad. Yes, the first episode we did. Yeah. Yeah. Please go on now, pardon this short tangent. Not at all. So we saw that the Vanara's were winning, even though they had no arms. In fact, they were doing this repeatedly. They would force the raxxers of their chariot by breaking it, force them into a hand-to-hand deal and then finish them off. Ravan realized he had to do something different even he had stepped out but retreated. And as he considered his options, he realized that there was one person he wanted to call on and that was Kumba Karina, his brother. If only he could wake him up. See, Kumba Karina suffered from a medical condition and endocrinalogical disorder, because of which he would sleep for many days at a time. And when he woke up, he was very hungry and right now he was sleeping. So Ravan's challenge was to wake him up. He sent some people to do this job and Wami, Wami, Kis description of how they woke him up is very interesting. So they went into his subterranean palace and as they went in, Kumba Karina was sleeping and his breath as he exhaled almost blew them away. So he is described here as a giant. They called out his name, they beat drums to try and wake him up, blasted conscious, but none of it worked. Then they started pulling his head. They hit him with maces, even that did not wake him up. Finally, the description is they got thousands of elephants to run up and down his body to finally wake him up. Clearly this is an exaggeration. He stretched himself, yawned, got up and he was famished. They had brought mounds of meat for him to eat, a pig buffalo deer. This is mentioned? Yes. Yes. Pig buffalo and deer meat. Yes. And not just that, he also had a lot of wine to go with that, as well as big jars of blood. That was his food and refreshed he went to meet Ravan. Ravan told him what was going on in the battlefield and Kumba Karina laughed. And he said, we had warned you earlier, but you didn't listen to us. Now you are suffering the results of your own actions. So there was some goodness and Kumba Karina. Yes, interestingly and Kumba Karina also gave him a lecture on why it's important to have a good balance between righteousness, wealth creation and enjoying pleasures. But Ravan told him, don't give me a lecture like a teacher. I need your help right now. Kumba Karina said, don't worry. I'll take care of this for you. Earlier as well, remember in the court, when in the showdown with Vibhishan, Kumba Karina had also been there. And even then, he did not agree with what Ravan had done, but he said, even then, I will support you. Now, Kumba Karina stepped out into battle. Once again, Walmikhi talks of him as a giant and how big his eyes were the size of chariot wheels. And his height was equal to 600 bows placed next to each other. Once again, it is clearly an exaggeration. 600 bows, you know, five feet for one, if you calculate, it's about 3000 feet or more. That's a kilometer. Some people wonder why we shouldn't take everything that is written in the Walmikhi Raman, exactly as it is. Well, clearly these are exaggerations. Person who is kilometer tall is not possible. Even if someone were very tall, how would he fit into Ravan's palace? How would Ravan talk to him and so on? Anyway, Kumba Karina stepped into the battlefield. And he started killing the Varnaras by the hundreds. His weapons of choice, one or both an arrows, he used clubs, maces, things he could hit with, even his fist. And because he was so large, Walmikhi says, with just one hit of his club, he would kill 100 Varnaras. Or he would scoop them up with his hand, 10 and 20 at a time and eat them. In short, Kumba Karina was causing great damage among the Varnaras, great casualties. And she'd arm stepped up to fight with him. He fired off the wire, we asked her and cut off his right hand. Kumba Karina flew into a wild rage. He took a tree and started charging towards Ram, with his left hand, he grabbed a tree. But Ram fired another arrow and cut off his left hand too. And then Ram fired arrows at his legs to immobilize him. And then with one final arrow, Ram cut off his head. The giant's lifeless body crashed to the ground and that was the end of Kumba Karina. When Ravan heard about this, he was heartbroken. He said, with my brother gone, I don't want to live. This kingdom has no meaning for me. What will I do with Zita? He was crying bitterly. In rigid could not see his father like this. And he stepped out into battle. In rigid, remember, he is now the only person among the rakshas leaders who has scored a win in this battle. On the first day, he had injured Ram and Laksman thought it, his job was done and had come back into the city. In rigid came out once again. Before I let you continue, this is another tiny question. Because we spoke of Vibhishan, Kumba Karan and Ravan. Three brothers. Is anything sad about their parents? Ravan's father was Vishrava Muni and his mother was Kai Kasi. His mother was a rakshasi. His father was not a rakshasi. In fact, interestingly, Ravan's father was a Brahman, a Muni, but he himself was a kratria, a ruler. We saw this earlier as well. Vishwar Mitra was the son of a ruler. He used to be a king, but he became a Brahman. Do you think that the other two brothers have also descended from the same pair of parents? Yes. I think so. Before I let you move forward, a bit of a war oriented question. Because in my eyes, yes, I knew all the in rigid stories, but I always viewed Kumba Karan as the second most powerful warrior from the side of the rakshasas. Would you say that it's actually in rigid? No, these are the three top warriors, Ravan himself in rigid and Kumba Karan. Okay. Yes. And what's adabod in rigid is that he's still tormented and has very advanced weaponry. Yes. Kumba Karan had immense physical power and in rigid had all the smart weapons. God. Technically the most sound. Yes. Just a little tiny historicy context. If you study all medieval battles of human history, from the last 1000 years, and I'm pretty sure even before that, the side that wins is always the one that's technically more advanced. And that's the the actual edge that one has in warfare. And I've had lots of soldiers on the show. They've also confirmed this theory that it's always the side with the cannons, the side with the guns, the side with the drones that ends up winning. So this is a huge advantage that the rakshasas had. And they let it down. They let it go. They advantage because they could fire from a distance and they didn't engage the one that was early enough. And now this was a hand-to-hand combat of person to person combat. And here the one that was were winning. Now already go on. Yes. So Kumba Karna was dead and Ravan was hard-broken in rigid couldn't see him like this. He came out to fight. And once again, he started killing Vanaras by the hundreds. They didn't even know where he was firing from. Some of the weapons that he fired would explode in the air, and then they would release sharp darts onto the Vanaras. Vanaras tried to look up to see where the attack was coming from. And they were struck in their eyes. In rigid, the interned his attention to Raman Laxman. He used the Brahmastra. And then Shahwarz so many arrows on them that they fell down unconscious. And already a lot of the other Vanar leaders were down. Sugriv, Angad. Once again, in rigid thought that his job was done and even back into the city. Vibhishan and Hanuman were the only senior leaders who were relatively unhurt in all this. Everyone else was terribly injured. And they were going around tending to the injured soldiers. When Vibhishan came across Jambavan. Jambavan had lost a lot of blood. With great difficulty, he told Vibhishan to quickly call Hanuman. And when Hanuman came, Vibhishan told him to get the Sanjeevani hub. So this is a fairly popular scene when Hanuman gets the hub to save the army. Let's watch this in a short video. Okay, Hanuman came up to him. Jambavan said, the fate of our army is in your hands now. You must quickly get four medicinal herbs. Sanjeevani, Vishalya Karini, Suvarnakarani and Santhani. Go to the Himalayas, Jambavan come to Marhasi. Between Mount Kailash and Mount Rishab, you will see another peak shining brightly. Many herbs grow on this mountain. There you will find the ones we need. Oh, greatest of one of us. Now go, only you can do this. So this is the famous story of Hanuman flying to the Himalayas and bringing back a mountain. Did that really happen? Let us first see how Walmiki has described it. And then we will consider whether the descriptions can be taken literally or not. Walmiki says, Hanuman grew his body to an enormous size. Even the mountain he was standing on got pressed into the earth. And then he took a giant leap into the sky and went off towards the Himalayas. He sip past mountains, lakes, rivers and cities. And soon he reached the mountain where the herbs were growing. But he could not find the ones he was looking for. The plants realized that someone was looking for them and made themselves invisible. With Nyaaya, Arthinam, Aayandam, Tatojakmoo, Adarshanam. And so Hanuman picked up the entire mountain peak with the trees and even the animals and taught it all back to Lanka. Ram, Lakshmana and the injured Vanaras were administered the medicines. Soon they all recovered. Hanuman then quickly went and put the mountain back in its place in the Himalayas. Hanuman is not going to do this using any yogic path. Walmiki has not mentioned anything about Hanuman using yogic powers or said these. And also consider this. The distance from Lanka to the Himalayas is about 2500 kilometers. Hanuman is said to have covered this distance four times for two up and down trips. In just a few hours, his flying speed would have to be many hundreds of kilometers per hour. Even if Hanuman had some means of making the journey himself, the mountain would not remain intact at such speeds. Trees get uprooted in hurricanes at much lower wind speeds. By the time Hanuman could have trot the mountain to Lanka, not a single tree would have survived. Most likely, these plants were native to the Himalayan region, but the medicines were also available nearby. Remember, on the first night of the war, the karud had also trot some such herbs. And when Sugrive had assembled his army, we had heard that the Walnar troops from the Himalayas had brought some medicinal herbs with them. The idea of getting a mountain of herbs could be a way of saying that Hanuman got a very large quantity of these medicines. Well, the medicines had done the job, Ram Laksman and the other injured soldiers were feeling much better. And then Sugrive ordered a counter attack. See, like I said before, this was a relentless war, non-stop. This was late at night, they had just recovered, but Sugrive told the Walnaras to charge into the city and set the buildings on fire. Earlier as well, we had seen how long in the Sundar Khan, Hanuman had set fire to some buildings in Lanka. At that time, the objective was different. He wanted to strike fear in the hearts of the enemy. And so he had put the fire at the residences of the senior most-structured leaders. But this time, Sugrive's objective was to reduce ravens' ability to fight the war. And so they targeted the storehouses which kept all the tools of war, armor, body armor, bows and arrows, bowstrings and so on. The Rakshas were caught by surprise because they were thinking that the enemy soldiers are lying injured and the leaders are dead. The Walnar troops stormed into the city, set the buildings on fire. They were chaos in the street, men and women running around, even elephants and horses. And then just as quickly as they had come, the Walnar troops came back, retreated to their positions outside the city. Ravan heard about this, he was living. And he once again turned to Indrajit and said, do something. Kill those two brothers, Ram and Lakshman. Indrajit came out once again. This time, when he came out, he put something on fire which created a lot of smoke. So the entire battlefield was covered by a thick fog. And through this fog, he started firing off his arrows. And he was changing his location all the time. So nobody could see where he would fire from. And he was killing hundreds of one of us like this. And then suddenly he retreated back into the city. And he came out of another gate, this time the western gate of the city. And he had with him on the chariot someone that looked like Sita, a lady that looked like Sita. And after he came out, he grabbed that lady by the hair and started hitting her. She cried, Ram, Ram. Hanuman saw this from a distance. And he screamed at him, stop that. But Indrajit said, you may think that killing a woman is not correct. But for me, whatever harms the enemy must be done. And he took his sword and struck the woman who collapsed to the floor of the chariot. Indrajit shouted out, look, I have killed Sita. And then he went into the city. Hanuman rushed to report this to Ram. Vivaitian was also there. And he said, this is a trick. I know Ravan very well. I know Indrajit too. They are trying to keep us preoccupied through us of our ground. What could it be? And suddenly Vivaitian realized what it was. He said, Indrajit must have gone to the shrine of Nikumbila to do a fire ritual. And if he finishes the ritual, he will become invincible. We must stop him. So, Lakshman, Vivaitian, Hanuman and some troops rushed to the shrine of Nikumbila. And they get there just in time. For Indrajit comes out without completing what he had started. And now for the first time, Indrajit is out in the open. And Lakshman engages him in a direct battle. Both were extremely skilled warriors. They had all the astras and chastras. They neutralized a lot of the astras that the other fired in midair. But still, many of the arrows found them up and both were grievously injured. Valmi Kisez, blood was flowing down their bodies like waterfalls. At one point, Indrajit lost his chariotya. What is interesting, Valmi Kisez that he took control of the rains himself and alternated between guiding the horses and firing off bows. So, he would guide the horses, leave the rains, fire an arrow and go back to guiding the horses. So, he was a very skilled warrior. But ultimately, he was forced of a chariot as well. And then, Lakshman loaded the iendrastha. iendrastha means Indra's astras on to his bow. He pulled the bowstring all the way to his ears, aimed the arrow at Indrajit's neck and released it. And in a flash, it was all over. Indrajit was no more. Interestingly, Indrajit means he who had defeated Indra, Lord Indra. He was killed by Indra's astras. When Ravan heard that his son was no more, he fainted. And when he regained consciousness, he was beside himself with grief. He cried bitterly. And Ravan was not the only one who was grieving. By now, Valmi Kisez that every family in Lanka had lost someone. Brothers, sons, husbands. And Valmi Kisez devotes an entire chapter, Sarga, to the lament of their luxuries. They are crying and lamenting the lost ones. It's interesting who they blame for all this and who they do not blame. Surprisingly, they have nothing to say about Ravan. But the two people that they are blaming are Shurpanka and Ravan. The luxuries themselves are saying, what was Shurpanka thinking when she lost it for Ravan? Clearly, she was wrong. And as for Ravan, they said, he is evil-minded and arrogant. If only he had listened to Vipitian. Now, there was no one left turn to. Ravan knew he had to come out to fight. He was down. He had clearly lost many of the battles in this, but he was not done yet. He would throw himself. And whatever he had into one final battle. He asked the rakshasas to round up everyone, house to house, grey, grey, grey, who could fight. And then Ravan came out for one final battle. Ravan first caused great destruction among the Vana troops and then Ravan engaged Ravan. Once again, like in Regith and Lakshman, both were very capable, both neutralized or brought down the ras in midair, but also both were struck, were injured. At one point in time, Ravan also struck luxement with the spear. And it is here that Hanuman once again got the Sanjeevani herb only for luxement. So, the Sanjeevani herb is required three times. On the first day when Ravan luxement were injured, they talked about Sanjeevani, but then the the Garud came and the second time we saw in the video when most of the leaders and many troops were injured. That's when Hanuman got the Sanjeevani and now. During this time, Ravan had gone back because he had lost his horses. So, he went back to get a fresh chariot. And when Ravan came back into the battlefield, Ravan and Ravan engaged once again, both fought for a long time, for hours. And once again, suddenly, Ravan's chariot, he returned the chariot back into the city. Ravan lashed out at him. He said, you fool, why did you do that? The chariot, he said, my lord, the horses are tired and so are you. I think we should take some rest. While Ravan was waiting for Ravan to come back, he thought of Agastiamuni. The great Muri had taught him the Aditya Ridaistotra, a prayer that helps Hanast once energy in battle. And Ravan stood facing the sun, recited the prayer and did Achaman, the ceremonial sipping of water three times. Is the prayer mentioned in the? Yes, yes. It's like a mantra packed into the narration. Okay, all right, let's watch the video. Ravan returned to the battle scene for the third time. Once more, a ferocious battle ensued between these two great warriors. This was chariot warfare at its best, sumahat wairatam yutam. At times, Ravan charged towards each other. At other times, they tactically retreated, only to attack from a different angle. And they attacked each other relentlessly. It seemed like the sky was entirely covered by arrows flying across. No one had seen a battle like this ever before. Stared at Ravan. The Vanaras at Ram, they stood frozen like characters in a painting. The battle raged on and on. Ravan wondered why the weapons that had worked so well against kurd, dushant and kaband for unable to finish off Ravan. While Miki says poetically that when Ravan cut off Ravan's head with a sharp arrow, a new head appeared in its place. And this happened a hundred times. Ravan realized that he had to try something different. And then he picked up a special weapon that Agastiamuni had given him. This arrow made by Lord Brahma himself was more like a missile launched from a bow. While Miki has described it as follows, it was huge in size and wait, but also hollow in the middle. Shari-e-dham Akashamayam, a fire burned inside and it emitted smoke as it went hissing through the air. It landed on its target like a thunderbolt. It could blast right through doors and walls, man and beast. Ram loaded the great weapon on his bow as per the proper Vedic procedures. He pulled the bowstring all the way back and fired it off at Ravan. The arrow hit Ravan on the chest and went right through him. Even as Ravan's bow and arrow slipped from his hand, his life breath also slipped out of him. The king of Rachasas was dead even before he hit the ground. Iti-ho-a-so. That is how it happened. The Brahmastra comes many times in the Raman. Even earlier in the Sundar Khan, Indrajit had used the Brahmastra to ensnare Hanuman. Then Indrajit had used the Brahmastra later on as well on Ram and Lakshman. So, the Brahmastra is not only one astra. There are different types of Brahmastra mentioned. What is said about his death? Because there was a line where he went that life left him before he hit the ground. That's the last mention of him and his body and his soul. Yes, so he was dead in an instant. There is a popular story in some retellings about Ravan lying on his deathbed and Lakshman going to meet him before he dies. That is not mentioned in the Walmikiramad. Does Ramsi have a dialogue about Ravan at all to anyone? Yes, so right after this once Ravan is dead, Mandodari and the other wives come out. I'll tell you what happens because he mentioned something to Vivaitian which is important about Ravan. So, the ladies come out and they are weeping next to Ravan's body. See, one side has won the battle, the war. How do we typically imagine the winning side will treat the losing side, especially the women throughout history? And now look at Ramsi exemplary behavior. He tells Vivaitian, please console the women and do the last rights for Ravan. So, the right treatment for the fallen soldier as well as consoling the women. Exemplary behavior, even Vivaitian was not ready for this. He was conflicted. On one hand, he had lost his brother and he was sad. At the same time, he was not ready to forgive Ravan for what he had done. But Rams tells Vivaitian that animosity should not last after death, Marana and Thani, Vairani. And he tells Vivaitian to your question now, what does he tell about Ravan? He said, Ravan was a great warrior. He deserves respect from you and me. He died fighting in the battlefield like a true chatriya. So, please go ahead and do his last rights. And then Vivaitian cremated Ravan's body did jalangily. And then Rams told Laksman to coronate Vivaitian as the next king of Lanka. And then he told Vivaitian to go and call Sita. See, Sita was inside the city in the Ashokwan, remember. And Rams could not enter any city during the period of his exile, one was. So, he asked Vivaitian to call her, but he also said, make sure she has taken her bath and put on her jewelry. That was a strange request. And Sita thought so too. She said, I want to meet Rama. The bath can wait. A snatwad rush to meet Chami. But Vivaitian advice that they should follow what Rama had said. And so, Sita got ready. And Vivaitian brought Sita to the battlefield in a palki, palankwin. And then told Rama, Sita is here. Rama was thoughtful. He looked down for a moment. And then told Vivaitian, please ask Sita to get off the palki and walk up to me. Again, Vivaitian couldn't understand why Rama was asking for this, but he went and told Sita to come towards Rama. At that time, the Vanara's and Raksasas had begun to gather. It was some sort of a spectacle. And Vivaitian soldiers were pushing them back. Rama told the soldiers not to push them back. Let them stay. And so, when Sita got off the palki, she was embarrassed. Let Jaya, everyone was looking at her. She walked towards Rama. And then, when she looked up, the eyes met. After months of longing, finally they had seen each other. And Marshi Walmikhi says, their faces lit up with joy. But then Rama's expression changed. And he said to her, Oh, lady, may you be well. You should know that I did not fight the war for your sake by kidnapping you. Rama had insulted me and I had to take revenge. I fought this war for the glory of the Iksra kud dynasty. But now there is a doubt about your character, Prabhacharitrasandeha. And I can't even bear to look at you. Surely Rama would have been attracted to someone as beautiful as you. And what sort of a man would take back a woman who has spent some time in someone else's house. You are free to go and live with whoever you wish to. You can live with Lakshman, Parath, Chaturgna or even Sugriv, or Vivaitian. It means nothing to me. Sita could not believe what she was hearing. In fact, we have spoken over four sessions, many hours. This is completely out of character, based on what we have heard about Shti Ram. If we are reading the Rama and when we come to this part, you may flip the pages back and forth to see whether you're reading things correctly. This is so odd. We have seen how Ram was pained by Sita's law. Again and again, we heard him say, I cannot live for a moment without Sita. Yam vina anot Sahay, muurtham api ji vitam. My life is meaningless without Sita. We heard this at Panchavati when she was kidnapped afterwards in Pampa. Ram explained his Ram talked about his longing for Sita. And Ram had also said, if I can be with Sita, I will not wish for anything else in the world. Not even Ayotya, sprayayayayam nahayo jaiayay. Sita cried. She could not understand why Ram was saying this. And she said, what you say is totally unfair in appropriate how come you are thinking like an ordinary person. I did not come here by choice. Ravan forcibly brought me. Now, what is my fault in all this? And if that's what you felt, you should have told me so earlier, I would have killed myself when Hanuman came to meet me. And then all this effort would have been saved. You put your life at risk unnecessarily. So many of your friends' lives at risk, so many people got killed. It was unnecessary. And if after all these years, if you still do not understand me, then I might as well be dead. She looked to Lakshmana and said, Lakshmana, I cannot live with this baseless controversy about my character. Please light a fire and I will walk into it. Note many months back, Sita had said some harsh and unfair words to Lakshmana in Panchoti before she got abducted. And now Ram had said, harsh and unfair words to Sita and Sita was looking for help towards Lakshmana. Lakshmana could also not understand why Ram was doing this. He knew what how Ram felt about Sita and how could he say such things. He looked at Ram angrily and then Marshi Walmi says, savith naya manash chandaam, rama sya a kara suchitham, rama made a gesture to Lakshmana. And then Lakshmana understood what was in his mind. A kara suchitham, a gesture and Lakshmana lit a fire. So Ram had indicated to him, I know what I am doing. Just go along. It was all an act, those harsh words. Lakshmana lit the fire. Sita walked up to it and she said, if I am not at fault in any way, if my character is spotless, may the fire protect me. And she started going towards the fire. There was a roar among the crowds. At this point, Marshi Walmi says, Sita jumped into the fire. The day was Rishi's Gandharvas, Indra, Brahma all came there. Agni Dev brought Sita out of the fire. And then they all spoke to Ram and said, Sita is not at fault in any way. Ram and forcibly brought her, never again, say such hurtful things to her. We have to understand that through the voices of the day was and Rishi's Walmi keeps telling us what the crowds spoke of, just as Sita was about to jump into the fire. And when they said, Sita is not at fault in any way, Ram said, I understand Sita very well. I know her very well. And I can never leave her. Now we ha to Maia Shakka. It is just not possible. Nashakka. We are inseparable. Like the sun is inseparable from the sun's rays. You cannot have one without the other. Sita was not at fault. But Ram knew that people would question and gossip about her. And he wanted to make sure that they recognized her as the queen and that they had no question about her. Ram's hurtful words to Sita that we heard were all an act. And this was a carefully crafted situation. If you saw right from the beginning, why did Sita have to put on her jewelry? Because Ram wanted to make sure that when she made her first appearance, people saw her as they soon to be queen and not as a destitute woman. Why did he tell the guards not to push back the crowds so that they could hear the hurtful words that he said. And then Sita had to walk up to him and he said those hurtful words when the people spoke up and said, Sita has done nothing wrong. Sita is not to be blamed. And this is exactly the outcome that Sita wanted. And with that, Sita and Sita were united once again. This previous chapter is very important for modern day context. And I was toying with the idea of even bringing this up or not. But I feel every faith in the world has its critics, which often come from other faiths. And of course, every faith in the world also has its set of secular people who just, you know, are more good energy towards other faiths. When it comes to an other, the critics of Sanatana, sometimes from other faiths and very, very often from our own faith, end up criticizing the Raman because of this part without talking about what you spoke about post Sita, as a outbursts. Yeah. And if you read things in isolation, of course, you'll get a completely different meaning. Yeah. This is what my friend Manish calls loosely informed, highly opinionated. When people criticize the Raman in this manner, but instead, hear the whole story. And also this is kind of the danger with taking the Valmiki Raman and creating your own spin on it. And here, I'm criticizing all the individuals who added their own spin on it over the last 14,000 years. What I do was there a need? See, there is a place for retellings. And some of the retellings are, even the authors are saying that this is just a literary work. And I think as long as the retellings are consistent with the spirit of Valmiki Raman, we can enjoy them all. Like I said, about the coil tail, why not a beautiful depiction? We can enjoy that. But where, if you start reading a character traits that are simply not there, like Raman being very nice to women, we just saw today that is absolutely far from the truth. That is not a retelling. That is a twisting. Yeah. I think it's almost become a bit of a saranatani flex to show off certain kind of elements of spin off stories that he did. You know that in some stories, Ravanasita's dad, like I've heard things like this, it's been said on the show as well. So that's so far from the Valmiki Raman. Yes. And that is why the importance of the Valmiki Raman, because that is the reference text. See, there are so many versions and people are confused what exactly happened. And for that question, the reference text is the Valmiki Raman. You know, more than a million people are going to watch these episodes collectively, what we've recorded. This is such an important retelling of the original text for the internet age. Can I interject with one more question? Yes. So we move forward. Yes. First of all, is the story complete? Is there some stuff left? A little bit now, they will go back to Ayodhya, but go ahead with your question. The question I have is this element of Srinam being God of human? This is another question that came up a lot in the comments section. And I think this is in reference to the previous episode where we spoke about Hanumanji's reality, where you often visualize him as a God, which he is, which is why we recite the Hanumanji Ali's eyes as well. But then mentions of the Vayana Ras tell us that they took off their monkey like masks and monkey like tails. So these obviously human beings which are putting on some kind of attire. Hanumanji was a very evolved version of a Vayana. Yes. Was a higher being for sure. Now, common understanding in Sanatana is that Ramji is an avatar of Vishnu. Can we bring in Vishnu Bhagawan into this part of the story and this part of this conversation as well? What's happening here? So your question was, is he human or divine? Yes. And the answer is both. First of all, right in the beginning, in the first discussion that we had in this series, first chapter of the Balakand itself, we had looked at the kinds of traits that Marshiv Almiki was looking for. Remember, Kohan was Minsam, Pratam, Loke, Unavant, Kastavirya, Vayana, and so on. And there he had used the word Narah, A. Wam with Amnaram. Narah means human. So he was looking for a person, a human who had these qualities and then he wrote the story of Ram. Afterwards also he has used the word Narah to talk about Shri Ram. So Shri Ram in the Balakand, the Balakand is human. We also saw that he goes through all the human emotions, happiness, love, anger, hopelessness, sorrow, all of it. Also many of the magical aspects that we find in other retellings are not there in the Balakand. So Shri Ram was human. At the same time, Marshiv Almiki has also said that the four sons of Vishnu had taken birth as the four sons of Darshat. And at other points also he refers to Shri Ram as Vishnu being in human form. So both, we got you. So proceeding with the story, we are almost at the end, Ravan is no more Ram and Sita are together. The war is over and so are the 14 years of exile. So it's now time to go home. Vishnu gets the pushpakwaman ready. All of them climb into the Waman and the Waman takes off for Yodhya. Along the way, when they are passing over Kishkinda, Sita suggests that they could pick up Tara and the other ladies. So they bring down the Waman, pick up the additional passengers and then often their way again. When they come close to Yodhya, Ram, Lakshman and Sita bow down in the reverence to the city. But then instead of arriving straight at Yodhya, Ram has the Waman, gets the Waman to turn back and land at Bharadwajmanis Ashram. Remember, during their one was also they had come south to Shumgawairpur, crossed over the Ganga and then got gone to Bharadwajmanis Ashram. After exchanging some pleasantries, Sita asks Bharadwajmani, how are things in Yodhya? Bharadwajmani knows why he's asking that. And he says, my disciples go there often and I can tell you that Bharad is ruling very well and he's waiting for you to come back. You had asked me earlier, what happens after the 14 years? So Kikeya, you had asked that Ram should be sent off into one's verse and Bharad should be made the king, you've raged earlier and then the king, what happens after 14 years? At that time, remember in Chitra Kud Bharad had said that if you don't come back on the very day the 14 years are over, I will kill myself. I'm only ruling in Yannim, but Ram wanted to find out what Bharadwaj was thinking now after all these years about it before arriving and he also wanted to know how Bharadwaj was ruling. So he had found that Bharadwaj was ruling very well. So he told Hanuman to go up to Bharad before they arrived, to tell him what all had happened. And then he said, observe Bharad very carefully, his body language and his expressions. And if you feel something is amiss, then let me know before I meet Bharad. The empire held no attraction for Ram, so he did not, he was not eagerly looking forward to becoming the king. His primary concern always was Prajapalan, welfare of the people and he had found through Bharadwaj money that Bharadwaj was ruling well. And so he wanted to find out that if Bharad wanted to continue, see after 14 years in power, maybe he thought differently. If Bharad wanted to continue, Ram was very happy to let him do so. So Hanuman went to meet Bharad, told him what had happened. Bharadwaj was stunned to hear all this. He did not know about Sita's abduction and the war with the Rakshasas or any of it. And he was delighted to know that Ram was coming back to Ayyothea. He hugged Hanuman and said, Chiras-Japurana, Kalumei, Manoratha, finally my wish has been fulfilled. The next day the Vaman arrived in Nandigram. By the way, Bharadwaj was ruling as a kataka, as he had said, from Nandigram which was just outside Ayyothea. So he had said he would not enjoy any of the luxuries of royal life while Ram was in exile. And so he was at Nandigram and that's where the Vaman came. It was an emotional homecoming for Ram, Lakshmana and Sita. Bharad told Ram, now that you are back, take over the empire. I have ruled in your name. In your absence, the treasury, food stocks and the army are 10 times what they were. So he had grown the economy 10 times in 14 years. He had ruled very well. Even then Bharad said, But no one can rule this vast empire like you. I am as capable of walking in your shoes. As a donkey is capable of walking like a horse, gutting kara, Yvashr was here. The very words he had said 14 years back, all these years in power had not changed Bharad one bit. And these were the Xwakus. We had seen earlier 34 generations. They had been ruling for 34 generations and still not a trace of any lust for power. Remember the great debate at Chitrakut, where Ram and Bharad had argued that the other is the rightful successor. Ram agreed to take over the responsibility of the empire. The coronation was held the next day. Before the coronation, Ram was brought from Nandigram to Ayodhya in a grand procession. They were musicians and dancers. Ayodhya erupted in joy. The streets and buildings were decorated with flags and flowers. And then Maharishi wasish took place the crown of the Xwakus on Shri Ram's head. Ram gave away gifts to the scholars and the needy. He honored Vivishan, Anuman, Sugriv and others. And Sita gave a very special gift, a necklace to a very special person. Anuman. After the coronation, Sugriv went back to Kishkinda. Vivishan went back to Lanka and thus began the glorious reign of King Ram. Maharishi Walmiki says, everyone was happy and all was well in the land. Sarvam Mudita may was it. People lived long in healthy lives. They lived in harmony with each other and with nature. And Ram was extremely popular. People could not get enough of talking about him. Ram did this. Ram did that. Ram O Ram O Ram Ethi. Prajanaam Abavan Katha. And thus Ram ruled for many, many years. Ava Mehta Puravratam Aat Canam Badramas Toa. This is the story. This is how it all happened. May you all be well. And with those words, the sixth book of the Walmiki Ramai and comes to an end, you the kind of Sampurnam and this is also the end of the Walmiki Ramai. Jayshira Jayshira. Fun. Feeling like a big box has been ticked from my own artistic journey. I don't know how you're feeling. Definitely. Thank you so much for giving me this opportunity to tell this story of Shira, the Charithra of Shiram, sharing it with all of you. Thanks for your life's work. That's what I'll say. But before we close off, I want to make one final remark. You had said just now that this is the oldest topic, the Adi Kavir written all of these thousands of years back and we are still talking about it. In fact, in the Ramai and itself, Marshir Walmiki has this sloque, Yahwats, tasyan, tigirayaha, Sarithash, jama heatale, tawad, Ramai and Akatah, low-case you, Prataryshati. Until the mountains and rivers exist on this earth, Ramai and the story of Ram will always be told. Now, think about it. How could Marshir Walmiki all of these thousands of years back be so confident that what he was composing will be told for all times to come. How could he be so confident? And the answer is relevance. The Walmiki Ramai is relevant for everyone and for all times. In the first session, you had asked the question, I think it was your first question. Why did Marshir Walmiki write it? And we had looked at the first few verses. Kon was mean Sam Pratam, Loke, Goonavang, Kastjaviravan, Dharmantne, Srakritadne, Satchi, Bhakya, Dhridavrata, who in the world lives today, who has all the qualities of an outstanding person, who is a great role model. And then in the next few verses, he had listed out these qualities, who has the strength of character, who is thoughtful, caring, generous, grateful, truthful, a doer, scholar. He has attained control over his anger, but won't remain silent in the face of wrong doing. And then Marshir Walmiki wrote the story of Ram, because Ram had all of those qualities. Now note, these qualities are universal human values. Who can argue that being grateful, thoughtful, caring is not good. And so Sri Ram exemplifies these universal human values. See, Ram's ideal is not limited by any philosophy or doctrine. There are no religious dos and don'ts in this book. And that is why Ram Iain is relevant for everyone and for all times, relevant for you and me today. See, you are doing some exciting and bold initiatives in your podcast about the global expansion and so on. Also in your personal life, you shared some interesting developments for you and for me. Can we think of the Ram Iain in our lives? That is the the question. Can we think beyond ourselves and ourselves interest? Can we choose to do the right thing even when the Kasa High can we support others in their time of need? And surely there will be times when we feel hopeless and overwhelmed. Can we think of what Sri Ram Lakshman, Sita and Hanuman did and know that we have to keep going. Never give up. And when we have done everything that we can do, can we accept whatever life throws at us without anger, without irritation, just the way Sri Ram accepted on the day of his exile. That is the relevance of the Ram Iain. This conversation is important because hopefully we can not only connect our audience with Marjival Miki's words but also show them how it can be useful in their day-to-day lives. It's petrol for the subconscious mind. That's how I look at the Ram Iain. Fueils your journey through life and it's always done that for every Indian who's familiar with the story. This whole series was created honestly primarily for global audience to expose them to the story of the Ram Iain. And there's a lot of people of Indian origin all over the world who wished to hear the story in English and who wished to know the true version of the story. So this is why it's a big artistic hallmark for me. It's been a goal of mine since my career began. And you were the right person. That Hanumanji saint and that Marjival Miki sent. Thank you. And you said it is for the global audience. Of course it should be like we said it is universal. As I'm moving into my thirties I'm 31 now I'll turn 32 this year. One of the big life lessons I'm understanding is that this variable's in life and this constants in life. And we often only address the positive constants which are your family members. You know maybe love as an emotion. Maybe growth is a constant. But there's another very big constant that you're not told about when you're growing up and often you learn it through the course of life. And that constant is the fact of unpredictability. It's not a variable. I've understood that life is deeply unpredictable. That's just the nature of being a human and this is exactly why you need that shot of morals ethics guidelines which you get from the Ramayana. Yes. I think that's what you're going towards as well. That this is a bit of a GPS for life in some ways. Definitely when we keep an ideal in front of us we become more like that. Remember we had spoken about this in our very first discussion before we started the four part series. Why should we read this again and again? Because over time the right actions become our default actions. As we've moved towards this ending note what I've realized about you is that you've had a very successful business career before you began this journey of starting the Ramayana. And you've told me off camera about all the adventures you had through your business career. There was some very intense difficult periods as well. But you just kind of swiftly move past those periods. So that you can be here in this room and share the story of the Ramayana with the world, the original true Maharishi Balmikirama. Yes, I suddenly feel blessed and privileged that I'm able to do the work that I'm doing for the last six years. Yeah. What I will end this podcast with is a truth that I've realized while sitting in front of you. You're easily the most humble person that we've had in the seat and I'm not told you this until now. But I genuinely feel that. Like I've spoken to all sorts of people. Never met anyone as humble as you. Which is why you know I think Sri Ram chose you himself. So thank you. Thank you for being in this room. Thank you. So that was the series finale ladies and gentlemen. Of course, if you've not checked out the first three episodes, do go check them out. We'll link them down below as well. It's been a spiritual purpose within the realms of my professional life to create this exact series at some point. And 10 years into YouTube, and we've finally been able to do an accurate retelling of Vilemikaze Ramayan for the 2025 podcast listening audience. Doing the series was almost therapeutic for me in so many ways. Got a glimpse of what Bharat used to be 14,000 years ago because this is the real history of India that we're not taught in schools. This particular series has been created with very very pure intention by both Yashudhipas and myself, which is why I hope that it reaches every single Indian and we get to know the Ramayan in much more detail than we knew before the series existed. We intend on creating a series related to the Mahabharath in the future as well. But please enjoy this one for now. We watch it if you must. And if you want an even more detailed version of this kind of a retelling, do visit Yashudhipas YouTube channel. It's called 21 Notes where he's given very very very detailed episodes related to Vilemikaze Ramayan, the only true and honest retelling of our epic. Thank you for listening and lots of love. Jai Shira."}