{"Episode Name": "The Kingdom Behind Glass", "Podcast Name": "NPR - Throughline", "Episode Link": "https://www.npr.org/2025/01/30/1227850875/the-kingdom-behind-glass", "duration": "2904", "text": " This message comes from NPR's sponsor, Sony Pictures Classics. I'm still here from filmmaker Walter Salas, is the true story of one family's resilience when a dictatorship attempts to tear them apart. Led by a golden globe winning performance by Fernando Torres. Now playing select cities. Before we get started, we just wanted to let you know that this episode contains descriptions of human sacrifice. Now, on with the show. Okay, so several months back, one of throughlines producers Lawrence Wu came to a pitch meeting with this wild story. It was one of those pitches that immediately made all of us sit up in our seats and listen. It had layers that just kept getting deeper and deeper. And I don't want to ruin it for you. So obviously, I will just say that it's about an object, a thing, but just sat around on a shelf for decades, going pretty much unnoticed. But in 2015, that changed. And it changed because a first-year college student decided it needed to change. Hi. Hey there. Sorry, give me a second. Oh, problem. Sorry. I'm trying to untangle this offense. So you know we have to call her up. Okay. Awesome. First, how are you? I'm good. How are you? Good. Her name is Ore Ogunbi. I'm an Africa correspondent at the Economist. And I'm also a graduate of Jesus College Cambridge. In 2015, she was in her first year at one of England's most prestigious universities. I've lived between England and Nigeria my whole life. I was born in England. I'm used in Nigeria and I was seven and I've been back and forth between both countries ever since. And so university-wise, my dad always really wanted me to go to Cambridge. In his view, the best place I could end up, which I understand my people see it that way. Cambridge is like the Harvard of England. Actually, it's much older. So I really should be saying that Harvard is like the Cambridge of the United States. It's this kind of old elite institution that for most of its history had a student body that came from England's upper classes, mostly male and mostly white. So when Ore arrived on campus, she felt at a place. When I got there, it was not very diverse. So the settling in in that first term was quite difficult because I just felt like I couldn't find people who I could relate with. But it wasn't just the lack of diversity among the students that felt alienating for Ore. It was everything she was surrounded by, the physical space itself. You go to any college dining hall, you go to prestigious parts of the college, really historical parts of any college in Cambridge. And it's likely to be covered in paintings of old white men who have made some significant contribution to the culture. There's never going to be a black person on those walls. Ore went back and forth to classes and meals and activities surrounded by these images of past school chanselers, donors, alumni. It just became part of the background. Maybe that's why at first she didn't notice the one object in the dining hall that would change the course of her life. In the same way that there was art on the walls, there's things on shelves, there's a whole bunch of things kind of lying around. I didn't notice it. It felt very much like it was hiding in plain sight. The thing she's talking about is a statue, a statue of a rooster, also known as the Okoko that's at least 125 years old. A few months into her first year, a friend of hers told her where to look for it. But the second he drew my attention to it obviously, I picked up in at the next time when into the dining hall. It's not massive, it's not too much bigger than your laptop. But it was sat on the shelf. And underneath it was a plaque with a message written in Latin, which was basically this art or this piece of art was equithed to the college by William Neville and was lucid from Benin in the punitive expedition of 1897, something to that effect. Today, Benin is a country in West Africa. But Benin was also the name of a major kingdom that was located in what's now southern Nigeria, as early as the 1200s, a civilization that produced incredible works of art, collectively known as Benin bronzes. Like the metal rooster, or a was staring at in her dining hall. I was embarrassed that I hadn't picked up on that. I know enough about African art and I'm familiar enough with what those kinds of antiques look like. My dad has been collecting similar works since I was a child. But it wouldn't take long for that feeling of embarrassment to turn into something else. Then the anger began to seep in because I'm just like, what on earth? Like in what world is this okay? What is going on? And that to me was when the clock starts it's turning and then we kind of set off down the rabbit hole. That rabbit hole would take Ora on a year's long journey to uncover how the rooster statue was looted. It's journeyed to her college at Cambridge University and the fight to return it to Nigeria. The origin story of this rooster is a tale of a clash between two major powers, one from Europe and one from West Africa. It's a tale of imperialism, betrayal and the making of the modern world. And it will remind you that behind every artifact is a universe, a story that will change how you think about your own history. I'm Rantabd-Fathath and I'm Rantin Atablui. On this episode of Throughline from NPR, The Journey of the Cambridge Benin Bronze and the War Over Artifacts. Hello, this is Naomi Kemp calling from Dr. Carolina and you're listening to Throughline from NPR. This is my favorite podcast I tell people about it all the time and over the last year it's been my reintroduction to NPR. Sometimes news is too overwhelming and I have to turn it off for my own mental health but Throughline is always a threat to fresh air and able to teach me just so much about things that I thought I knew something about already and can always find something new to learn about. This message comes from Capital One, presenting sponsor of the 2025 Tiny Desk Contest. The Tiny Desk Contest is back and from now until February 10th, unsigned musicians from around the country can submit their original song for consideration. The panel of judges will pick standout entries to feature along the way and you can follow along and choose your favorite videos as well. The winner gets to play their very own Tiny Desk Concert then play a tour with NPR Music this summer. Want to come along for the ride? Visit tinydeskontest.npr.org to learn more then check out the VentureX card from presenting sponsor Capital One. Use it to book through Capital One travel and earn 10 times miles on hotels and 5 times miles on flights. What's in your wallet? Terms Supply, ccapitalone.com for details. This message comes from NPR sponsor Exelon, powering 10 and a half million customers. CEO Calvin Butler shares one way that Exelon's family of utility companies aims to support the communities they serve. We invested over $18 million in workforce development programs in 2023 and expect to do the same in 2024 because if you're going to serve diverse populations and diverse cities, you need to have employees from the cities in which you serve. To learn more go to ExelonCorp.com slash energy best. Part one, blood metal. Benin City, 1500s. It was nothing short of a marvel. It was very vibrant and dynamic. It had bustling markets with trade in yams, palm oil, textiles, iron tools and more. Located in what's now southern Nigeria, Benin City was the capital of a vast kingdom. The kingdom's military was highly effective, maintaining stability within the region and controlling all of the waterways as far as Lagos. And it was technologically advanced. Benin City even had street lighting. These large metal lamps filled with palm oil, which illuminated the streets at night. Making it one of the first cities in the world was such a feature, an even an underground drainage system. This is Wondo Achebe. And I am the Jack and Margaret Sweet and Daled Professor of History at Michigan State University. My main area of concentration is West Africa. Wondo says the Benin Kingdom's Golden Age was between the 15th and 19th centuries. At its height, it was well organized. It was thriving. It was a highly advanced society. And one of the kingdom's greatest feats was the walls that they built, which stretched over 10,000 miles. Making them the largest earthworks in the pre-mackenized world. The walls which rivaled the length of the Great Wall of China took hundreds of years to be built, requiring unfathomable hours of labor. It's interconnected earthworks were not just defensive structures, but also a statement of the kingdom's engineering brilliance and power. These marvels are what greeted the first Europeans who came to Benin City in the 15th century. So when European traders and explorers arrived, which is how we know what we know, for the most part about Benin, they were astonished by what they saw. For instance, you had a Portuguese captain remarking that Benin City was larger than Lisbon and described its streets as seemingly endless. And the Benin Kingdom's power and wealth would only increase as they started trading with Europeans. They would trade raw materials like pepper, ivory, and eventually rubber. And in return, European traders are offering fire arms, textiles, and other goods. Fire arms that help the kingdom conquer their neighbors and expand their territory. The Benin Kingdom would use the guns to raid villages to steal people and sell them. This is the Adria Farmer Palmen. I'm executive director of the restitution study group, and we fight for reparations for descendants of enslaved Africans globally. Like with any kingdom, there's almost always a dark side. The Benin Kingdom had long participated in the slave trade in West Africa. And when the Europeans arrived, the Benin Kingdom began selling them enslaved people too, making them a part of the Trans-Atlantic slave trade. During the late 15th and 16th century, the kingdom is actively participating in the slave trade. These are captives from all of its military campaigns, and sometimes it would be captives or these tributary states made offerings to Benin. Right? In addition, the kingdom also enslaved individuals who were convicted of crimes. In exchange for slaves, the Europeans would give the Benin Kingdom. Brassam on Elas? Manila is derived from the Portuguese word for bracelet. They often came in the shape of a horseshoe of various sizes, usually made of brass, bronze, or copper, and they were used as slave trade currency throughout West Africa by European traders. The Benin Kingdom required that the Portuguese paid for human captives with these manilas. And roughly at the beginning of their trading, you could buy an enslaved captive for seven manilas, probably towards the end, a male would cost 57 manilas a female would cost 50. These manilas were used to fuel the kingdom's artistic tradition. These renowned artisans would melt these bracelets down to create these intricate bronze and brass sculptures and clacks. Sculptures like the rooster statue that Ore Ogumbi saw in the dining hall at Jesus College. And it's these so-called Benin bronze and this that we're talking about today. What Daedria now refers to as... Blood metal. Blood metal, meaning that the price for these works of art were the lives of enslaved West Africans sent into the abyss of the middle passage. And the principal purpose of creating these bronzes was in service of Benin Kingdom's royal family. The royal palace was adorned with copper engravings and brass plaques that celebrated victories. They recorded Benin's achievements and reflected the kingdom's grandeur. So these engravings and plaques told stories. And at the center of the Benin royal family was the Oba. The Oba or King wasn't just a political leader but held divine status, acting as a spiritual bridge between his people and the gods. The Benin Kingdom was ruled by a long line of Obas. They were like religious political and military leaders rolled into one. And for centuries, they enjoyed control over the trade routes in their kingdom. But all of this would begin to change when Europeans started making their way into the region's local economies and politics. Starting with the Portuguese and eventually by the 1800s, the British became one of the primary trading partners with the Benin Kingdom. With the introduction of the pneumatic tire by J.B. Dumla in 1888, rubber became a critical raw material for industries in Europe, especially for bicycles and later automobiles, right? Benin had fast rubber forest. This was an era of massive industrial growth in Europe, especially in England. And so natural resources like rubber and palm oil were in high demand. And it turns out that many of those resources were in what's now southern Nigeria, the land the Obas ruled over. So throughout the 1800s, the British tried to insert themselves more and more into the rubber and palm oil trade. It became a struggle over control of resources. It got so bad that the Obas would periodically shut down trade, frustrating the British. And so the British tried to fix this by proposing a treaty in 1892, which historians say, undermined Benin's sovereignty, allowing for free trade, it allowed for the presence of Christian missionaries and it required the king, the Oba, to consult with British on governance. In other words, the Oba would need British approval for dealing with anyone else. Yet according to the British, the Obas signed this treaty, something historians like Wondo Achebe call into question. So a number of historians have actually suggested that if he did sign this treaty, he probably didn't understand what he was signing. The answer is still to this say unclear. But another perspective from historians is that the Oba only had one question on his mind as the British were trying to explain this treaty. Were they declaring peace or war? The British reassured the Oba that it was a peace treaty. And so the Oba might have signed the treaty in the hopes that it would quell tensions that it might prevent an all-out war. But despite this treaty, the Oba maintained control over trade and it's this control that frustrated the heck out of British ambitions. The Oba continued to exert control even though the British claimed he was violating their treaty. This would set the stage for a confrontation, one that would change the course of West African history. Coming up an unannounced guest. This is Sanjay from San Jose in California and you're listening to two-line by NPR, brought to you by the best caucus show host ever, Ranting and Run, who've transformed my indifference to the subject of history in middle and high school to curiosity and Roy as I have listened to any of the same. This message comes from NPR's sponsor, Exalan, working to improve energy reliability, access and sustainability while powering more than 10 and a half million customers. CEO Calvin Butler shares how Exalan powers small businesses with more than just utilities. You don't get kudos for keeping the lights on to the gas flowing. You get kudos for showing your communities that you serve, that you care about what they're doing. We do believe that the small businesses are the backbone of this economy and we have an initiative called 2C2I which is all about identifying local businesses that are encouraging climate technology and doing things to help decarbonize and clean up the communities in which we operate. So we're investing in those businesses and serving as mentors because we want to help them grow and we also believe that innovation comes from small companies because they have to because their resources are being stretched every day. They're creating the jobs and we're investing in them. To learn more, go to exalancorp.com slash energy best. This message comes from Carmax, boldly searching for your next use vehicle with Carmax. You don't have to settle on anything when it comes to your ride. Instead, steer clear of the ordinary and buy the car that's right for you because Carmax makes it easy to stop settling and find a car you'll love today. Start shopping now at Carmax.com. Carmax, the way car buying should be. Part 2, the City of Blood. By the late 1800s, the British Empire and the Benin Kingdom were on the brink of a conflict over control of key trading positions in West Africa. The British claimed that the Oba or King was violating a treaty they'd signed. The Oba, for his part, shut down trade whenever he felt the British were becoming a threat. Both sides were at an impasse. In comes James Phillips. James Phillips. He was acting British Consul, which meant his job was to oversee trade in West Africa on behalf of the British Crown. He basically been raised to eventually have this kind of job. He grew up in a family with strong clerical and military background. We know that he was educated at Upinham School, which was a prestigious independent boarding school. Phillips later attended Trinity College Cambridge where he studied long. By his early 30s, James Phillips, like many other upper-class British bureaucrats, decided to pursue his fortunes overseas, working for the Empire. A lot of these young European men were going for adventure, making a name for themselves. By the way, this is Wondo Achebe, a history professor at Michigan State University. And I think that was a propelling force for a lot of these European men in Africa during this time period. And that propelling force would put Phillips in the center of a national scandal, a new story that would grip all of England in the late 1890s. The King of Bunnine has continued to do everything in his power to stop the people from trading and prevent the government from opening up the country. This is from a letter James Phillips sent to the British Prime Minister in 1897 arguing that they should take action. In order to fully open the region to British trade, I am convinced from information which leaves no room for doubt, as well as from experience of native character, that Pacific measures are now quite useless and that the time has come to remove their obstruction. Basically, Phillips is like, look, if we want to efficiently extract resources like rubber and palm oil, things England needed to fuel its rapid industrial growth, we need to get the Benin Kingdom's King or Oba out of the way. I therefore ask for his Lordships permission to visit Bunnine City in February next, to depose and remove the King of Bunnine. Monday 16 November 1896. Well, the British Prime Minister basically left Phillips on red for several weeks. Still, Phillips was an ambitious young man and he decided to send a letter to Benine's King, requesting a meeting. So, Phillips requests to meet with the Oba. And he does this, even though he'd already made it clear in his letter to the British Prime Minister, that he wanted to depose Benine's King. The timing of this request clashed with the sacred Ewet festival, during which the Oba was secluded to perform rituals that renewed his spiritual authority. Remember, Oba of our unwin was semi-divine. And Phillips gets a response. The King said, no, you cannot visit. Why don't you come back in about two moons, two months? Phillips ignored all of the cultural imperatives and he proceeded toward Benine City. January 1897. He set out with a set of white men and with an uncertain number of servants, but perhaps over 200 carriers. This is Dan Hicks. I'm Professor of Contemporary Archaeology at the University of Oxford. And he wrote the book, The Brutish Museums, which among other things tells the story of James Phillips and his crew, most of whom were African workers hired by the British. They reportedly took no firearms except for revolvers, wetlands in some of the accounts. Along the way, a royal agent of the Oba warned Phillips that any white man visiting the city would be killed. We have been threatened and solemnly warned at every step that the soldiers of the King of Bunnine are waiting to fire on us. Despite the warning, Phillips party continued working their way towards Benine City. The road or rather path he went along was rather broader than the usual West African brushpath, but only fit for marching in single-file. This is from an account of a British officer who was there. It was then about 3 p.m. and we were walking in much the same order as when we started. They stopped at villages along the way to rest. In the afternoon, they were about 14 miles into their march when. Suddenly, a shot rang out a few yards behind us. Followed by rapid fire. That seemed to go back almost to the last village we had passed. At the first shot, we couldn't believe that the firing was in earnest and thought, as someone suggested, that it was only a salute in our honour. Phillips party and their confusion thought they were being welcomed by soldiers from the Benine Kingdom. In fact, Phillips told his men not to get out their roof alvers. This was a mistake because soon they were facing a hail of ammunition. The idea was soon exploded by the cries from our wretched carriers and yells from the Benine men. A surviving British officer recounted a chaotic scene of gunfire and machetees. On a strip of road about 15 yards long with the bodies of some six or seven of our unfortunate carriers lying on the road. It was carnage. Phillips does not survive. Phillips is killed. The exact numbers of dead are still to this day unclear, but it's thought that most of the Europeans in Phillips' party were killed along with many of the African workers they'd hired. Word quickly got back to England. Newspapers there called it a massacre. The circumstances of how the killing comes about and the nature of that expedition, it was at hostile, was it seeking to provoke? Was it an inexperienced administrative centre of in order to provoke a response? All of that's unclear. But the damage was done. It's this ambush that outrageous Britain to no end. Over the next several weeks, some of the British press began running stories about what a horrible place Benine City was. They published disturbing accounts of human sacrifice and brutality. By the time the punitive expedition was launched in 1897, the British public had been primed to see it as a moral crusade. One body was on a crucifix tree with the arms and legs outstretched, the Manchester Guardian, January 1897. You know, they didn't hold back, you know, imaginative accounts as they possibly could of the blood and guts. At various parts of the city there were corpses, some headless or armless or otherwise mutilated. The idea of the city of blood was associated with Benine City. portraying Benine as a barbaric society. We should note here that there is historical evidence of human sacrifices being carried out at the Royal Court. Without a doubt, you know, this was a world court that continued to practice forms of court, slavery, almost certainly forms of human sacrifice. But these descriptions often lacked any kind of context. Benine City became known among many in England as the city of blood. Just weeks after Phillips's party was ambushed in Benine, the British government prepared for a revenge attack. It would come to be called the punitive expedition. A very large force with hundreds of sailors and soldiers was amassed. A flotilla of ships was stocked with heavy weaponry. A dozen seven pound RML mountain guns. Think of a small cannon. 14 Maxim guns to be carried across the land. Machingons. 24 Maxims on the Warships. Six rocket tubes. Early form of a rocket launcher. 1,200 rifles. More than three million brass bullets. By February 1897, British forces sailed for Benine. Coming up, the battle for a kingdom begins. Hi, this is Phil Maccacy from Atlanta, Georgia. And you're listening to Q-Line from NPR. This message comes from energy. Where everyone can invest directly in solar energy projects across the world's most profitable renewable markets. Since inception, energy has helped investors realize a 12% return while earning steady monthly dividends. It's a smart, impactful way to diversify outside the stock market with real assets. Learn more at energyad.com slash NPR. Pass performance is not indicative of future results. All investments carry risk, including the potential loss of principle. Part three, as much mine as it is yours. Imagine a country of 2500 square miles, one mass of forest. Imagine this forest stocked with trees some 200 feet high. Imagine the fact that you might easily walk for an hour without seeing the sun overhead, and only at times get a glimmer of a sunbeam across the part. And you have an elementary conception of the Bush country of Benine, Reginald Bacon. This is an account from a naval officer who took part in the punitive expedition. So in February 1897, a force of about 1,500 British soldiers were equipped with maximum machine guns, artillery, and rockets. They set off in three columns, attacking villages along the way. And they've got barbed wire and they've got electric lighting and they've got all these sort of modern booms of weaponry. Weapons that were not used by most West African forces. And it was with VEEZ that they launched their punitive expedition against Benine. Over the course of nine days, the British violently ripped through the rainforest and zeroed in on Benine City. A searching volley soon disclosed the enemy who commenced the attack, never venturing into the open, but keeping inside the cover of the Bush and firing their long guns at us. The Benine defenders were regrettably armed without dated weapons. To these we replied with sectional volleys and a deadly sweeping fire of the Maxims. And because their weapons were outdated, they were quickly overwhelmed. Eventually, the British soldiers arrived in the heart of the kingdom. The enter Benine City on February the 18th 1897. Wildfire is the only name for describing the flames. They raised the Obas Palace. They raised secret sights. The air was filled with a thin black smoke which gusts of winds swept in every direction, curling and re-thing it in fantastic shapes. They erased much of the kingdom's physical and cultural heritage. Soon everything seemed in a blaze. I think the sheer scale of the destruction is something that's hard to get a sense of. This is Dan Hicks again, author of the British Museums. The fact that this was a desecration of a religious as well as a royal landscape and that literally they burned everything to the ground. They absolutely, you know, level the place to the ground. After the attack, the British forces did as they wished, including the British built themselves in golf course. Never mind other things about golf course. Yeah, yeah, there's a golf course there within within the first month. A nine hole golf course as for Oba Ova Mamwen, the king, he fled the city and hid out in the rainforest for six months. He later surrendered in 1897. And he was exiled to Calabar where he remained until his death. With the Oba out of the way, the British incorporated the Benin kingdom's lands into its own holdings in West Africa. Marketing the end of the mean kingdom sovereignty, which is what the British wanted to do from the get-go. Among the rubble in Benin city, the British forces found treasure beyond their wildest dreams. Buried in the dirt of ages in one house was several hundred unique bronze plaques suggestive of almost Egyptian design, but of really superb casting. The British encounter and unparalleled number of cultural treasures. So it is estimated that over 4,000 treasures were looted, including brass plaques, ivory carvings, ceremonial regalia, and textiles. These treasures were distributed among British officers. So it's a chaotic three-four. They were taken back to London by soldiers and sailors and administrators and some kept in families over generation, some sold immediately on the open market. And so within weeks, the artworks, items that were royal, sacred, and ancestral art were being bought up, Berlin, in London, in Oxford, and were being put on display. On the message rose very clear. This is a dead culture. And over the next century, many of these artifacts, known collectively as Benin Bronson, ended up in museums. So today these treasures are housed in museums worldwide with the British museum holding the largest collection of about 700 treasures. And others ended up in private collections and universities. Like the rooster statue, that Ora Ogumbi first spotted in her college dining hall. This piece of art was bequeathed to the college by William Neville, who was a Liverpool trader and the banker in Lagos, who donated this item to Jesus College Cambridge. Yeah, the reason supposedly was the form of the cockrool or the rooster is an emblem of the college that sits there in the dining hall of Jesus College for decades. Until 2016, after Ora and her peers began organizing for it to be taken out of the dining hall and returned to Nigeria. We were asked to present to the Ethical Affairs Committee And yeah, they also spent some questions about where it's going to go. Can they look after it? Ora and her classmates had done their research and the college had even gotten the letter from the Nigerian government formally requesting the return of the rooster statue. So we thought that might help, uh, our case, but nothing. And then one day, sort of out of nowhere, the statue disappeared. But it wasn't clear what they were going to do with it. A spokesperson said at the time that the college and university would discuss and determine the best future for the Ococo, including the question of repatriation. Jesus College declined to comment further on this issue. As for Ora and her peers, their hope started to wane. I don't think there's anything more we could have done. It just felt like no progress was being made. I mean, I just, I'd given up on this thing happening to be quite honest, but I was still going to these meetings convincing myself that I don't know, maybe this one next meeting would be different. So in the meantime, Ora went on with her life. Why this time I graduated, I was like, okay, they've succeeded in wearing me down. I'm, I'm, I'm not screaming and kicking up a fuss about this anymore. It's not going to happen. But then in 2019, Jesus College decided to return the statue and a few years after that, Ora gets an email. Friday 15th of October, 2021, dear Droso-win, I'm now pleased to share the colleges to return the Benin bronze cockful tonight, Jira's National Commission for Museums and Monuments, and Wednesday 27th of October. This will be the first institutional return of its kind. Now I was like, what? All those years of fighting for the Benin bronze to be returned to what Ora and her peers believed to be its rightful place was finally going to happen. It was going back tonight, Jira. Welcome everyone here to the Frank fan and auditorium at Jesus College. As we gather for the ceremony to formally hand over this Benin bronze, this Ococo, which has not belonged to us. I'm still here tonight. This is the video from the ceremony of Jesus College formally handing over the Benin bronze. The head of the college, the director of Nigeria's Commission for National Museums and the younger brother of the sitting Oba are all in attendance. And center stage on a white pedestal is the rooster statue. And in the crowd, we're Ora and our fellow students watching what they had started six years earlier, come to fruition. And to see it happening, especially when you would, well, I had definitely given up on the idea that it ever would. It was crazy! Cambridge University's Jesus College would be the first institution to return a Benin bronze. Shortly after, other institutions and even museums started following suit. Countries like Germany pledged to return looted Benin artworks. And so did the Smithsonian Institution here in the United States, which had a total collection of 39 Benin bronzes. In 2022, I saw an article in the New York Times that the Smithsonian would be returned in the bronze as I was quite shocked. This is Daedra Farmer, Paul Minnegan, who's the executive director of the restitution study group. The moral claim is that the bronze is for us. Are the embodiment of our enslaved ancestors? And they are the source of our education about who we are. Daedra argues that the Benin bronzes should also belong to the descendants of the people, the Benin kingdom sold to European slave traders. I have East Side DNA, and by the way, anyone listening to this program that has East Side DNA from their ancestors who were enslaved are literally coming from the Benin kingdom. The East on people were part of the kingdom's neighboring the Benin kingdom. So when Daedra found out about the Smithsonian's decision to return its collection of Benin bronzes to Nigeria, she was shocked. Their justification was that they were looted, that they were stolen artifacts. They had been taken by colonizers. But Daedra was like, well, the colonizers, the British, took these bronzes from the kingdom that enslaved my ancestors. So why should Nigeria have full control over them? These are very expensive, Velas. The value of the bronze is that something people don't like to talk about. One overhead sold not long ago for about 12 million US dollars. Daedra and her organization filed a petition to stop the Smithsonian from returning the bronzes to Nigeria. The goal to allow the descendants of people sold into slavery by the Benin kingdom to have a say in their fate. So, I sent them documentation, not just from all of the scholars around bronzes, but from their own website and their own publications. In an email exchange at the time, the Smithsonian told Daedra, more research was needed to concretely link the objects in their collection to the slave trade. For institutions like the Smithsonian, the question of ownership and repatriation is a tricky process. The process of return is not something that is simply about a decision by the British Museum or by the British government or by the Metropolitan Museum in New York or whatever. It's about hundreds of institutions and individuals who at the moment are caring for these items and the decisions that they may get doesn't mean that you can suddenly decolonize the museum. It doesn't work like that. It's case by case. It takes time. So what we found was that 29 of the Benin bronzes that we had here at the Museum of African art more from the raid of the Benin kingdom in 1897. This is Linda St. Thomas. She's a chief spokesperson at the Smithsonian Institution and was interviewed by NPR Culture Correspondent Chloe Velman about how museums go about repatriation of artworks like the Benin bronzes. And they will be unquestionable. I mean, they were obviously stolen from their, you know, place of origin and then sent to museums and private collectors around the world in the early 1900s. Therefore, we did not want to keep them in our possession anymore and we wanted to return them. As for Deirdre's argument that descendants of slaves should have some form of ownership over the Benin bronzes, Linda declined to comment. Instead, she pointed us to the district court's decision where a judge ruled that Deirdre and the restitution study group lacked valid claims to challenge the Smithsonian's transfer of their Benin bronzes. After they were denied, Deirdre and the restitution study group appealed to have their case brought up to the Supreme Court. The court would ultimately decline to hear Deirdre and our organization's petition against the Smithsonian. The Smithsonian had already begun transferring much of its collection to Nigeria's National Commission for Museums and Monuments. I agree 100% that African Americans, African Caribbean people, Africans have every single right to this history, to these treasures. It is our heritage. It is that which makes us who we are and so what I'm saying is I agree to agree 100% with her characterization. It's as much hers as it is mine. But historian Wondo Achebe does not agree with Deirdre about where the Benin bronzes should be housed or who should really have control over them. Treasures that were stolen away from Africa should remain in Africa. It is a heritage that should be enjoyed on African soil. And if the Benin kingdom, if the federal republic of Nigeria decides that it wants to loan Europe, the US, wherever, our treasures for a period of time, then we do so. For Deirdre, this is about more than just control over the bronzes. Part of this whole effort is to ensure that we have access to these relics so that we can learn our history. The willingness to sit and work together is about sharing cross-cultural education and just ending what essentially is a war. You know, it hasn't ended yet. It won't end until we sit down together and we work together and heal. Which brings us back to Ore and the Rooster. This isn't just a pretty thing to sit on a shelf. It's not just a fancy trophy of your war. It's history. It means things to people and has meant things to people for centuries. So you can't understand this object without all of that history because it's not just an object. It is all those things. That's it for the Speak Show. I'm Rhonda Bdfadath. I'm Rommtine Arablui and you've been listening to throughline from NPR. This episode was produced by me. And me and Lawrence Wu Julie Kane. Anya Steinberg, Casey Meiner, Christina Kim, Devin Cardiyama. Airena Gucci. Voiceover work in this episode was also done by Aidan Crow, Greg Hartz, Felix Sammon, Jonathan Levin, Chris Springthorpe, and Geland Cardan-Rethi. Thank you to Johannes Durgy, Tony Cavan, Nadia Lancy, Jay Venasco, Chloe Veltman, Edith Chapin, and Colin Campbell. Fact checking for this episode was done by Kevin Volkol. This episode was mixed by Robert Rodriguez. Music for this episode was composed by Rommtine and his band Drop Electric, which includes... Navid Marvi, Shofu Juara, Anya Mizani. And finally, if you have an idea or like something you heard on the show, write us at throughline-n-pr.org. Thanks for listening. Support for NPR and the following message come from Rosetta Stone, the perfect app to achieve your language learning goals no matter how busy your schedule gets. It's designed to maximize study time with immersive 10-minute lessons and audio practice for your commute. Plus, tailor your learning plan for specific objectives like travel, get Rosetta Stone's lifetime membership for 50% off and unlimited access to 25 language courses. Learn more at Rosettastone.com slash NPR. Support for NPR and the following message come from IXL Learning. IXL Learning uses advanced algorithms to give the right help to each kid no matter the age or personality. Get an exclusive 20% off IXL membership when you sign up today at IXL.com slash NPR. This message comes from Warby Parker. What makes a great pair of glasses? At Warby Parker, it's all the invisible extras without the extra cost, like free adjustments for life. Find your pair at Warby Parker.com or visit one of their hundreds of stores around the country."}