{"Episode Name": "Trump\u2019s proposal to \u2018take over\u2019 Gaza", "Podcast Name": "Fareed Zakaria", "Episode Link": "https://www.podtrac.com/pts/redirect.mp3/pdst.fm/e/chrt.fm/track/E31CC9/swap.fm/track/2nzGkisFXQswLYT5s325/traffic.megaphone.fm/WMHY1708404867.mp3?updated=1739144034", "duration": "2565", "text": " Now at Verizon Business, every business can get the new Samsung Galaxy S25 Plus, whether you're a new customer, loyal customer, or a returning customer. This one's for you, you, and you. On America's most reliable 5G network, get the new Galaxy S25 Plus on us. Powered by Verizon Business, 256GB on us. New device payment purchase agreement, select trade-in, and business unlimited plan required. Credit varies by smart phone trade-in, apply to account over agreement term from 36 months. New supply, limited time offer. This episode is brought to you by Shopify. Forget the frustration of picking commerce platforms when you switch your business to Shopify. The global commerce platform that's supercharged as you're selling, wherever you sell. With Shopify, you'll harness the same intuitive features, trusted apps, and powerful analytics used by the world's leading brands. Sign up today for your $1 per month trial period at Shopify.com slash tech, all lower case. That's Shopify.com slash tech. This is GPS, the global public square. Welcome to all of you in the United States and around the world. I'm Farid Zakaria, coming to you from New York. Today on the program, President's three weeks into his second presidency and Donald Trump seems hell-bent on shaking up American foreign policy, the national security establishment, in the world. He wants America to take over Gaza, who want to be a wise guy, but the Riviera of the Middle East. He's offered buyouts to everybody in the CIA. He's dismantling the US agency for international development, and he's brandish tariffs against friends and foes. We'll tackle it all with a great series of guests. Richard Haas, President and Emeritus at the Council on Foreign Relations, David Milaband, the head of the International Rescue Committee, and one of Europe's most important CEOs, Matthias Dofner. Also, it's been two months since the Assad regime fell to Islamic militants. Is this the new Taliban or something else? But first, here's my take. It's been a head-spinning week for American foreign policy, with tariffs against Canada and Mexico dramatically announced and then suddenly postponed. USAID was gutted, and President Trump said he wants the US to take over Gaza. The most revealing lens through which to look at all this might not be Donald Trump's pronouncements, but rather those of his aides and supporters. The tariff tantrum suggested that foreign leaders are becoming skilled at handling Trump. They modify him with token concessions, allow him to declare victory, and then return to business as usual. The concessions that Mexico and Canada made were either small-bore or policies that they were already pursuing. Mexico agreed to send thousands of troops to the border at the Biden administration's request, and are now doing the same for Trump. In the case of Canada, Trump's own statement notes that Canada was agreeing to implement its border plan, much of which had been announced over a month ago. Some conservative commentators pointed out the obvious. In the words of a Wall Street Journal editorial, Trump blinks. The Fox anchor Laura Ingram implied that the President caved to huge negative reaction from markets, saying, I'm not too impressed about the concessions from Canada. Indian media reactions were similar. Canada's CTV News published an article with the headline, Canada takes a stand and Donald Trump blinks. The country's satirical show 22 minutes has a Donald Trump look alike declaring victory. I did the impossible I made peace with Canada and ended the unjust trade war that I started. I'm signing this. This executive order, I did not lose, but I totally won the trade war order. Of course, from JD Vance to Mike Johnson, Republicans fell over themselves to praise the stunning negotiating powers of President Trump. The Trump effect is in full force, Johnson posted. At this rate of achievement wrote Elon Musk, not only should President Donald Trump be on Mount Rushmore, I want to personally work the chisel. For the abrupt dismantling of USAID, Trump supporters scrambled to adjust. Secretary of State Marco Rubio quickly blasted the agency, saying it was out of control and unresponsive. This was the same agency that he had repeatedly posted in favor of over the years, written about in his book with tried and admiration, and recently recommended funding increases to President Biden. The pattern is now familiar and was followed after Trump's Gaza announcement. Those who had long supported Trump's determination to end America's military interventions cheered when he announced he would take over Gaza, send in troops of necessary, displace two million Palestinians to neighboring countries, and stay in Gaza for long-term ownership. Kayleigh McEnany responded with this on Fox News. President Trump is playing four-dimensional chess. You all are playing checkers. Later that day, Trump officials began walking back key aspects of the President's plan as did Trump himself. If you don't understand all this, you haven't played four-dimensional chess. Donald Trump's White House is now a court, and his courtier scurry around, aware that the mercurial monarch might change his mind at any time. Dick Tock is terrible, can suddenly become Dick Tock is great, and they need to pivot quickly. It reminds one of the court of Henry VIII, the monarch who went from being the greatest defender of the Catholic Church to a vicious opponent because he wanted a divorce that the pope would not sanction. One man who refused to play the games, Sir Thomas Moore, had his head chopped off. The reason Trump forces AIDS and supporters to save things that they know are false is to enforce a regime in which loyalty is paramount, overriding facts, overriding your long-held convictions. This might seem like an amusing spectacle, but there is a real cost. In the case of USAID, it will translate into death and despair for millions of the poorest people on the planet. On trade, it remains a mystery as to why Trump singled out Canada. In the 2024 fiscal year, less than 10% of migrant encounters happen at the Canadian border, and just 0.2% of fentanyl seizures occurred there. America runs a smaller trade deficit with Canada than with China or Vietnam. In fact, if you put aside Canadian crude oil, the US sells more to Canada than it buys from it. However the effect is clear. For Canada, the US is turning into an undependable ally, and it will try to lessen its reliance on America and search for new markets and friends from Britain to China. The largest effect, though, is on American democracy. The scholar Francis Fukuyama has noted that the history of modern government has been a steady movement away from patrimonial rule, the rule of a single strong man to benefit his family and friends, towards rule by institutions and rules and norms. He notes that in the United States now, we are seeing the return to patrimonial rule. As citizens freely debating laws are replaced by supplicants, begging the king to favor their interests. Go to CNN.com slash for read for a link to my Washington Post column this week. And let's get started. Joining me now to talk about Trump America in the world is Richard Haas. He is the president emeritus at the Council on Foreign Relations and the senior counselor at the center of your partners. So Richard, let's start with Gaza. You know that region very well. What do you think? There are a lot of people who say, well, this is out of the box thinking maybe it stirs thing up. What do you think Trump's proposal in Gaza has done on the ground? It's out of the box, but doesn't mean it's better just because the box isn't working. There's policy failures over the years. I think on the ground for read, probably plays into Moss's hands. They can say, look, there's no chance of any compromise working. We write all along to be maximalists for the Israeli right. This is what a gift from heaven. This is minor from heaven. Their whole policy is to deny Palestinian nationalism. Transfer of people out of Gaza is for them the perfect precedent because what they really want is transfer of 3 million more Palestinians out of the West Bank or what they call Judea and Samaria. Plus it shows read even more worrisome. If things get violent enough, it creates conditions which some will then point to and say, we therefore need to transfer. What does that do? It incentivizes the dynamic on the West Bank to become more and more violent. The Palestinians will get more radical. Israeli settlers and defense forces will get more combative. This is not a good dynamic. It encourages the radicals on boats. Absolutely. What do you think Trump was thinking? I mean, you've talked to him. What's going on? My own sense is he comes from a world of deals and you can always sprinkle in new incentives off this doesn't work. What about this? What about that? I think he's missing from the world of real estate. This is not something that can be easily bought off. One of the two most powerful things, you know, you and I spent a lot of time talking about Middle East. One is nationalism. Virtually everyone in the Middle East coming out of World War II wanted a state of ground. Zionism was getting a state of their own for the Jews. Palestine and the Kurds have been denied it. This denies it and kills off the chance. Second of all, it reinforces humiliation. And what did we learn around 9-11 and other times? Humiliation is a dangerously powerful human motivator. So I think this is actually not only going to buy things off, but rather it's going to inflame the special. You can't tell a Palestinian family, you know, I build you a nicer house in Egypt. What they want is their own country. 100% man cannot live by bread alone. The idea that there's going to be a financial, soft put forward that's going to assuage the desire for a country of their own is simply a, simply preposterous. What else do you, you know, are you noticing in this, you know, it's been three weeks the fight with Canada, the fight with Mexico. Is there, is there, you know, what's the broader implication? One is being a friend buys you nothing. It's almost like everyone's equal. In some ways, it's worse to be a friend because you have more connections that can then be leveraged. You can threaten your security dependence. We can threaten our trade or investment. The other thing that I noticed is someone who's worked, you know, for multiple presidents is the lack of anything resembling a serious policymaking process. There ought not to be surprises. You never want to send a president out there to propose something and someone says, well, hold it. Did you think about this and say, take the Gaza thing again? What about the cost? What about troops? What about Palestinian reactions? And you can see it was on the road too because he himself walked back half of that in 24 hours. That's what a policy process is meant to do to anticipate how is everyone going to react? What's the context? What are the implementation concerns? Maybe what seems to be a good idea, but then when you really put it on your microscope, not so good. And that's what we're seeing is does not exist in the Trump administration on tariffs. We saw it. You put them on. You take them off. We see it now with Gaza. There's a haphazard quality to this and a shifting number of players, special envoys here and there. This is not a process that is sustainable. Now, you talked about the allies feeling there's no point. There's no advantage to being an ally, maybe even a cost. What can they do? Is that realistic? I mean, what's going to happen? Well, I think allies are going to start there. It'll be gradual. It's diversified there portfolios. A country like South Korea is going to have a much more serious debate about nuclear weapons of their own. Other countries are going to say like Colombia, we don't really want to have four-fifths of our economy dependent on access to the United States. Maybe we dial it down. Maybe, by the way, we bring in China. One unpredictable thing Trump has said, and he mentioned it once during the campaign, which might be a kind of good out of the box thinking, is on Iran. He seems to something going on there where he keeps saying, I wonder if there's a deal to be had. I wonder which is ironic because he pulled out a clear deal. What do you think is possible? That's one of the two areas, the other being Ukraine. Surprisingly tough attitudes towards Russia. I think he was surprised and disappointed that it's Putin and non-silentsky who's the the obstacle to a ceasefire on Ukraine. Iran, he doesn't want to use force. I think he almost like, remember, he went from NAFTA to the USMCA, a better deal with Canada, Mexico, and trade, even though he pulled out of the 2015 deal. I think he wants now a better deal with Iran, what he calls a verifiable, peaceful, nuclear agreement. I actually think there's a possibility for it. How you're told is saying no, but I actually think this administration would be wise to press Iran and essentially set up a deal on the nuclear. To reduce, you put a ceiling, you make it verifiable. We could eat some sanctions, you won't get attacked. I actually think that's where the, that's where the of exploration. All right, on that optimistic note, we're going to end. Richard House, always a pleasure. Next on GPS, President Trump's dramatic attack on USAID is not only shocking, it is life threatening for some of the poorest and most vulnerable people in the world. I'll discuss the ripple effects with David Milaband, the president of the International Rescue Committee. Next. I'm CNN Tech Reporter Claire Duffy. This week on the podcast Terms of Service, we'll hear from a high school senior who gave a purse smartphone all together. People will ask me like, oh, why do you have a flip phone? Everyone thinks it's a punishment. They're like, are you grounded? And I'm like, no, I actually chose this for myself. What are the challenges of committing to a pledge like this? And is it worth it? Also CNN's Terms of Service, wherever you get your podcasts. The fight against malaria, the disbursement of HIV medications, the delivery of 500 metric tons of food in places where famine looms. These are all examples of work that has either ceased or been thrown into grave uncertainty since President Trump's decision to freeze foreign aid and all but dismantle the US agency for international development or USAID. What would be the effect on the most vulnerable people in the world joining me now to discuss as David Milaband, he is the president of the International Rescue Committee and the former British Foreign Secretary. You guys spend an enormous amount of time on the ground with these vulnerable populations. People are often near, near-death, near starvation. Is there any way for other funds to come to them? What's going to happen to these people? Well America has an incredibly proud and effective record of being a leader in global foreign aid, about $4 in $10 globally that are spent on foreign aid come from the United States. It's also been a very effective high value for money, spend with real rigor against diversion of aid. Health is probably the best example. Global health, half you mentioned USAID, half of USAID spending is on health. That's partly on life-saving healthcare, which Secretary Rubio has said he wants to keep. It's also mapping trends in Ebola and fighting Ebola. It's clinical trials of new drugs. It's basic health centers that provide primary care. It's non-communicable diseases that are such a major issue across the developing world. There is a moral question at issue here, but there's also a strategic question which is that these investments in a connected world are part of America's strategic interest. And I think the critical point you alluded to in your introduction, every administration will do a review. That makes sense. It wants to align things behind its priorities, organizations like mine want to contribute to the review and partner in a thoughtful process. The danger now is the suspension, the freezing of all aid, apart from a small number of life-saving waivers. That's what creates jeopardy, and it also creates cost, because when you tear down systems, when you sack people, when you close down offices and health centers, as everyone is now doing, it takes money as well as time to put them back together. The International Rescue Committee works on helping people, the most vulnerable people in the world, what has this done to you, to your organizations' ability to work in those places? Obviously, absolutely committed to keeping our mission going. And we're waiting for the results of the review. What we know is that certain programs, for example, around climate resilience, some programs around sexual and reproductive health, they're going to be canned in the new administration. They're not going to be supported. We are working very, very hard to raise funds to find donors who could gap fill for that. That's a tough process, because it's just been going this week. What we know is that those programs offer enormous value for money. Just listen to this. $80 to help an out-of-school kid in Northern Nigeria. I mean, that's the kind of value for dollars to deliver a shot of vaccine in East Africa. These are the figures of a highly efficient, highly effective good investment. And that's the rallying call we're making to the US government. Let's reform together. Let's deliver more value for money together. We're also saying to those outside the US government, come and support these vital programs. When I've seen the examples, there are all these examples of being published on X on Twitter. I haven't come across a single case that seemed like it was fraud or corruption. There are a lot of them which are ones that clearly the people tweeting them out disagree with. But have you seen anything that's publicly been released that suggests fraud or corruption or anything like that? I think first thing to say, it's important to be very rigorous and very zealous about the way in which aid money is delivered and to make sure it reaches the right people. Second point, all of the international evidence shows that it's the big prestige projects. There was a lot of work done in Afghanistan on this. It's the big prestige national projects, infrastructure projects that are the most prone to fraud. The community-based projects are actually the least prone to fraud for a very simple reason. People blow the whistle when their money is not reaching the people it is being intended for. I know that this sector takes incredibly seriously the fight against fraud for a very simple reason. We're in it because of the mission of helping people and it's doubly in our interest to make sure that no fraud occurs. And if ever there are allegations, they're properly investigated in the stamp time. It's a sad day for the United States, which has been, as you say, the kind of the most generous country, the richest country in the world. It has also been the most generous country in the world. Do you think it changes the world looks at America? I think that we're in a really important moment. The Trump administration was elected, obviously, to disrupt. Some things do need disrupting. This is an area where reform and progress is essential. And I think that the world is watching and wants to see a committed engaged America that is thoughtful and plow-ful and the way it does its work in the kind of public-private partnership that has stood America in such good stead. David Miliband, pleasure to have you on. Thank you very much. Next on GPS, the next target for Trump's trade wars could be the EU. When we return, I'll talk to a top European CEO who has some interesting ideas about what his continent should do. China, Canada and Mexico have all come into Trump's crosshairs on trade. And the European Union could be next. My guest has some interesting ideas about what the EU should do. Matthias Doffner is the CEO of the German Media Company, Axle Springer, which owns many outlets such as developed and political. He has a new book called Dealings with Dictators, a CEO's guide to defending democracy. Matthias, welcome. Let me ask you about the situation for Europe now. I mean, as you know, a lot of people feel like Europe is in trouble economically. The EU needs to get its act together. They've been reports like the Draghi report by Mario Draghi saying, you know, the EU is lagging behind. And now, entered Donald Trump, who has talked often about how he wants to put tariffs on the European Union. How do you react to that? Well, for it, let me give it for a second a bigger context and then a very precisely will answer your question. So I think democracy, the open society model is threatened by rising autocrats and dictatorships, mainly Russia, Iran and Islamists and most importantly China. The conflicts, the major geopolitical challenges that we face, the Russian war on Ukraine, the Hamas war on Israel and the potential takeover of Taiwan have one thing in common. That's the goal to weaken democracies. And concretely to weaken the biggest democracy in the world, the United States and more concretely to split the United States and Europe. That is the most efficient way to weaken democracy. And I think in that context, it is important that we are not taking the wrong exit here. If the US and Europe would start a trade war that would just strengthen China, if Europe and the United States could get together, have some negotiation and Trump is a very transactional president. And I think he has a point, the EU is imposing terrorists on average of 5.5% on US goods. The US are on average only 3.3%. So there is a point to renegotiate, but it should not increase tariffs. It should lower tariffs or ideally no tariffs in order to stimulate transatlantic trade. And then we have a common case to negotiate with China. If America does it alone, because there is a misunderstanding that America first means America alone, then I think China will benefit. If America and Europe would represent not 300 million citizens, but 800 million citizens, we have a real leverage at the negotiation table in order to negotiate with China symmetrical trade relationships, which would be beneficial for the US and for Europe. I think the goal is not a split between America and Europe. That's what these autocrats want. Is it possible that Trump's kind of threat of abandonment forces the European Union to get its act together on things like structural reform on opening up and creating a single market, for example, for technology or banking? Is it possible that it has the \u2013 because the Europeans feel we're on our own, we have to absolutely \u2013 and I think it is desperately needed \u2013 and whether it's because of Trump's policies or whether it's because we understand ourselves that we got to change. Ronald Reagan once said, famously, the European definition of successful economy is, if a business moves, tax it, if it still moves, regulated, if it's dead, subsidizes. And not be the future of Europe. Europe is totally over-regulated. America has less regulation in this deregulating. The whole world is deregulating in Europe, regulates more and more, no innovation, no real growth. It's a sad case. I mean, Europe is like a sleeping beauty and it needs to wake up and hopefully these developments, even if there are more tensions, help that we will have a healthier and more successful outcome. What do you think of Elon Musk's support for what is often called Germany's far-right party DFT? Also here \u2013 I mean, I don't know. I mean, I know Elon Musk for 10 years and we have a friendship relationship almost and we have a lot of discussions, but here I think he gets it wrong, I have to say, because what he loves is disruption. And he sees that disruption is necessary. That's why he likes me lay, that's why he likes me lonely, that's why he likes Trump. But the I've seen Germany is a different kind. It's a, at least partly non-democratic organization that is very pro \u2013 Russia, pro-putin, very pro-China, very anti-American, very anti-capitalist, anti-business. And of course, parts of the party have a decent anti-Semitic tone from a far-dist and perspective. It may look healthy to have that disruption, but if you know more, then there is a very dangerous element in that movement. If you know more, very important words in this context, my dear is to have the pleasure to have you on and it's an important book I hope people read. Thank you. Next on GPS, two months ago, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's 24-year dictatorship fell to Islamic militants. Now a former Jihadi is running the country. We will talk about what all this means when we come back. This week on the assignment with me, Adi Cornish. Elon Musk and his Department of Government Efficiency, otherwise known as Doge, have rattled the federal civil service to its core. So now that the richest man in the world has been put in charge of remaking the US government, the questions are, how is he doing it? Who's helping him to do it? And what does it mean for the government services you might just be taking for granted? Listen to the assignment with me, Adi Cornish, streaming now on your favorite podcast app. It has been two months since Islamic rebels stormed Damascus, stopping the 53-year Assad reign in a matter of days, stunning Syrians and the world. But celebrations in the street quickly turned to deep uncertainty of the direction of the country. The rebel leader Ahmad Al-Shara, the former head of Al-Qaeda in Syria, is now the interim president. So just where is Syria headed? Having me now is Ali Amalik, a Syrian American journalist and the author of the home that was our country, a memoir of Syria. You're just back from Syria. Tell me what your dominant impressions are. That it's a unique and monumental moment, and I say that in a value neutral way, because it's loaded both negative ways and positive ways. It's the end of something which implies several dynamics and accounting that needs to happen. It's also the start of something. And it's like a twilight moment, and it was fascinating time to be there. It was overwhelming. There was a solid 24 hours where I really didn't know what to say or how to feel. I had a New Mexico, 2013. That's not long enough for things to be drastically different, yet everything had changed. What were most people saying? Are they mostly hopeful? Are they mostly worried about the onset of another civil war? Both of those things, I think, exist at the same time. I think they're also very much in a roll-up. They're sleeves mentality because they realize there's a lot to be done. And at the window to work with the new government, their willingness to also work with people will close at some point. I think it's clear and everyone on the ground says that the new rulers were not really expecting to make it all the way to Damascus. And all of a sudden, they found themselves in charge of much more territory and carrying the hopes of many more people. I think than they had previously imagined. And so there is this window in which they are talking to people. And civil society and normal Syrians are quite aware that that window will close. And they are not going to be let out or kept out of self-determination. So people talking about democracy and elections. These are the metrics that we think about. I don't think that's exactly what people are talking about. They're talking about stability. They're talking about electricity. They're talking about infrastructure. They're talking about the sanctions being removed. And they're talking about being included in their own governance. And when we talk about this new leader, President, he's changed his name. Has he changed his ideology? First we explain the name change. He had a kind of dawn together. Yeah. Joanna, from the Golan Heights, which is where he is originally his family is originally from. And he's now using his real name, Ahana Shah. And yes, there's definitely been a sartorial change. Everyone keeps asking me, is this sincere? And I just think you don't go to politicians for sincerity. He was a rebel leader. And now he is a politician. And these are often awkward transitions. We've seen movements as they try to transition to governance falter. So what gives you hope that Syria will not descend into a kind of sectarian slash Islamist versus the others of civil war, the way it happened in Iraq, the way it happened in Libya, the way it almost happened in Egypt and then the army intervenes? What gives me hope is Syrians themselves. I've been talking to him or porting on Syrians since 2011. And I think the same way we are conscious of what has happened in the region and has happened in Syria. So are they. It's not that they are ignorant as to what happened on their borders in Iraq. They know what happened in Lebanon when the idea that the civil war is over. Now everybody goes back to life as normal. They know that that failed. They know what happened in Libya. And we sort of have experienced our own version of Libya to some extent. In many ways they are greeting 2011 in the same spirit that they're greeting 2024, that the future has arrived and they have a role to play in that future. But in those 14 years they have become infinitely less naive. So the mood is hopeful and people are at least in the cities hoping to build a new country. Hopeful and vigilant. We know exactly what the fault lines could be or the fault lines that both internally and externally have been played upon by malignant actors. I think Syrians are tired of that. They want to state. They want to live. They want electricity. They want to harness the talents that other countries have taken advantage of when they've had Syrian populations in their midst. So we fail to say your advice to the West would be drop the sanctions, engage with Syria, try to make this work. And listen to Syrians. The Syrians haven't been silent in the last 14 years. Even in exile they have even as refugees. For example, they've held using universal jurisdiction in European courts. They've held members of the regime end of ISIS accountable for their crimes. They've been speaking to each other. I think a government is of course the immediate interlocutors. But the Syrian people have not been silent and it's just really a matter of what are we willing to listen. Oh, the pleasure to have you on. Thank you. Next on GPS. El Salvador's president made headlines. Because we, by offering to jail American criminals in his country's notorious prisons. What is going on? I will ask an expert. This week, El Salvador took the spotlight with a bold offer to the United States. During a visit from US Secretary of State Marco Rubio, conservative president Naib Bukele, suggested his country could take in not just deported immigrants, but American criminals as well. Rubio said the US would consider what he called a quote, act of extraordinary friendship, unquote, despite being a plan that many experts say is illegal. Indeed, it's notable that Rubio's first trip in his new post was still Latin America, a region many believe the US has long neglected. So what to make of all this? Brian Winter is the editor in chief of America's quarterly, which covers Latin American politics, business, and culture. So before we get to Bukele and the prison offer, why is Marco Rubio choosing Latin America as the first visit? That's always symbolically important. And he has clearly decided that he wants to send a signal. I think this administration for it is more focused on Latin America than maybe any US government for the last 30 years. The reason why is they know that they're big domestic policies of reducing irregular immigration as well as cutting back on drug flows into the states and some work on China as well depend on Latin America. And I think Secretary Rubio's choice of Latin America unusual. And we haven't seen anything like this in years for a Secretary of State to go there first. I think reflects those priorities. Latin America and Senator- Senator-America is very divided between some new rulers, Millet and Argentina, Bukele, in El Salvador, who seem very populous and in some ways kind of on the right side of the populous divide even in the United States. And then there are others like the Colombian president who is a kind of radical left-wing guy, I think many people would say, is the administration favoring one group over the other? Well, there's no doubt that several governments around Latin America are happy with this increased attention from the United States. But it's also true that being an ally of the US does not necessarily protect you in this current environment. The Panamanians found that out. I mean, you have a president in Panama who's also right of center, Molino, very allied with the United States. And yet they were on the receiving end of these threats that President Trump made in his inaugural address about wanting to take back the Panama Canal. So it's not just about left-right. It's all governments all over the region are asking themselves whether being an ally of Washington, like what that really means. Bukele and this offer to take American prisoners. The backdrop, I think, is important to remember is Trump during the campaign was sent some very nasty things about Bukele. Right. I think that this offer of prisons is at least partly a peace offering from President Bukele to President Trump, recognizing that Trump accused him during the campaign last year of sending his criminals to the United States. And that's why crime was down in El Salvador. Of course, the stories were complicated than that. I mean, as far as I can tell, the real story is he didn't send the criminals to the United States. He had locked up, you know, with vast numbers of people, including suspected criminals, criminals, you know, people who are innocent. But crime has gone down like 80% or something like that. Well, how are things going in El Salvador? Is he a success story? Look, there is frustration all over Latin America with organized crime, which is not a new issue in the region. But we've seen a quarter of the UN a doubling in the amount of cocaine that is being produced in the world of the last decade. That has given cartels, organized crime groups, all kinds of resources, and they're creating havoc. In countries that they've never really had much of a presence before, including places like Ecuador, Peru, and others. And so what we see not just in El Salvador, but across the region is an eagerness to try those kinds of tactics. The downside is that it results in due process and other things being suspended. And you end up with innocent people being put in jail according to organizations like the Organization of American States. But that is a sacrifice that Salvadorans seem willingness to make, and perhaps people in other countries as well, because as you noted for read, the results are clear. Homicide's are way down. Fair to say that you're looking at this landscape and this region so far, while Trump has used some strong armed tactics and the less is so much more powerful, it is always going to win in one of those contests. The U.S. is focusing on the region. It is trying to get results that are important. This doesn't seem as much of a kind of a strange mess that some of the other parts of the world. The Trump people seem to be focused on this for good reasons. Well, they see, again, these U.S. domestic objectives of reducing immigration, of reducing drug flows. They believe that Latin America is key to that. It's also true that we have governments all over the region who are trying to, in some cases, imitate the deregulation, the cutting of government, the generally-pro business policies that they see in the Trump administration. And with these elections that we see over the next year, year and a half, there may even be more governments in the region that end up aligned with Trump. So, but again, not even they consider themselves safe. Some of them are asking questions, do we need to look more to Europe, do we need to look more to China, do we need to look more within our own countries to make sure that we're not at risk of being threatened by a government, the White House, that's dealing with us at a transactional level. Brian, always a pleasure to hear from you. Thank you for your time. Thanks to all of you for being part of my program this week. I will see you next week."}